Corrosion Science, Vol. 38, No. 3, pp. 44W55, 1996 
Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved 
0010-938X/96 $15.00+0.00 
001&938X(96)00142-5 
IRON CORROSION IN DRINKING WATER DISTRIBUTION 
SYSTEMS-THE EFFECT OF pH, CALCIUM AND HYDROGEN 
CARBONATE 
A. SANDER,* B. BERGHULT,+ A. ELFSTRiiM BROO,+ E. LIND JOHANSSON* 
and T. HEDBERG* 
* Department of Sanitary Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, S-412 96 Giiteborg, Sweden 
+ Department of Inorganic Chemistry, University of GBteborg, S-412 96 Goteborg, Sweden 
Abstract-The corrosion of iron in synthetic drinking water has been studied through potentiodynamic sweeps and 
coupon tests. Corrosion rate follows a reversed proportional dependence on the logarithm of the free carbon 
dioxide content (the sum of protonated carbonic acid and dissolved carbon dioxide). In water with low total 
carbonate concentrations the addition of calcium ions decreases the corrosion rate. In waters with moderate and 
high total carbonate content no dependence on the calcium concentration is observed. 
Keywords: A. steel, B. RDE/RCE, B. weight loss, C. passive films, C. rust. 
INTRODUCTION 
Internal corrosion in drinking water distribution systems 
Municipalities worldwide invest large amounts of money in environmental technology, with 
the municipal sector controlling a considerable share of this sum. Distribution systems for 
drinking water and wastewater account for 80% of the investment in the municipal sector.“* 
External corrosion is regarded as a major factor affecting maintenance costs and lifetime of 
drinking water pipes. Also, internal corrosion of pipes can cause breaks and overflows in the 
distribution systems, but the major effect is water quality deterioration. Corrosion products, 
containing both iron and copper, are found at the consumers’ taps as well as at the sewage 
treatment plant, degrading the quality of the sludge as a soil improver. Corrosion products 
inside the pipes reduce the effective diameter and, thus, increase pumping costs. Corrosion 
product coatings are also a good environment for the growth of micro-organisms. 
It is important to distinguish between (i) uniform corrosion, (ii) pitting corrosion and 
(iii) corrosion-related water quality problems. While pitting corrosion can determine the 
lifetime of the pipe, the major part of the corrosion products is due to uniform corrosion. 
Corrosion-related water quality problems are mainly a function of the precipitation and the 
dissolution properties of the corrosion products formed.3,4 
Minimization of corrosion problems depends on investigations of the effects of water 
quality -on the pipe materials. Several studies have shown that different pipe materials 
require different water qualities.5-8 Many investigations describe specific networks, 
corrosion problems and treatments to improve the water quality.‘-12 However, the 
Manuscript received 12 July 1995; in amended form 1 September 1995. 
443 
444 A. Sander et ~1. 
detailed mechanisms for pipe material corrosion coupled to the effect of different water 
compositions are not well understood. 
Corrosion of iron pipes 
For oxygen induced corrosion on iron pipes different rate determining steps are 
possible:2,7,13 (1) oxygen diffusion to the surface; (2) the anodic electron transfer reactions; 
and (3) the transport of corrosion products from surface to bulk. 
Oxygen diffusion determines the corrosion rate at stagnation.275 An increase in flow 
velocity reduces the thickness of the diffusion layer and dissolved oxygen can more easily 
reach the metal surface. Diffusion of oxygen also increases with increasing temperature since 
the viscosity of water is reduced and the diffusion constant increases. Scale formations act as 
additional diffusion barriers. At high flow velocities the electron transfer is the rate 
determining step. 
The formation of passive layers has been the subject of many investigations and the 
saturation or Langlier index has been widely used since it was introduced in 1936.14 The 
Langlier index indicates whether the water is supersaturated or undersaturated with respect 
to calcium carbonate, calcite. Langlier proposedi that if the water was treated to a slight 
supersaturation a thin film of calcium carbonate would precipitate on the surface and 
protect the metal from further corrosion. However, later investigations15-17 showed that the 
Langlier index is insufficient to predict iron corrosion. Local pH variations due to oxygen 
reduction can cause precipitation in undersaturated waters” and other forms of solid 
calcium carbonate than calcite were not taken into consideration.17 Further, most waters 
are saturated with respect to siderite (FeC03) well before saturation is achieved for calcite. l8 
Therefore, siderite is believed to play an important role as an intermediate in the formation 
of protective layers.19.20 
The buffer capacity is referred to as the most important factor for the formation of good 
protective layers according to the siderite model, because an increased buffer capacity leads 
to slower precipitation of the corrosion products and the formation of more protective 
scales.*’ When the buffer capacity is high, the iron(I1) ions can form siderite instead of 
forming the less protective goethite, FeOOH, iron hydroxide, Fe(OH)2, or other iron 
products, and the scale will become more dense and stable. Siderite then oxidizes to 
magnetite, Fe20j, or goethite (pseudomorphous) while retaining a crystal line structure and 
therefore a more protective scale. 
The presence of humic substances slows the precipitation rate and more stable protective 
layers are formed.22 On the other hand, chloride, sulfate and fluoride all increase the 
corrosion rate through interference during the formation of the protective layers.16 
The aim of this investigation was to determine the influence of the carbonate system, pH 
and the calcium content on the rate of uniform corrosion. Previous investigations have been 
oriented towards coupon tests. In this investigation parallel studies of coupons and studies 
at rotating iron electrodes have been carried out to achieve a better understanding of the 
underlying mechanisms of corrosion. 
EXPERIMENTAL METHOD 
Electrochemical measurements: instrumentation, cells and electrodes 
Slow scan potentiodynamic sweeps (PDS) were carried out using a Hewlett Packard 
synthesizer 3325A and a Princeton Applied Research potentiostat/galvanostat 363. A 
Iron corrosion in drinking water distribution systems 445 
Hewlett Packard multimeter 3478A collected the data and a Hewlett Packard 
microcomputer HP 85/86 controlled the system and analysed the data. Computer 
programs for system control and data analysis were specially developed. 
A conventional three-electrode electrochemical cell was used. The cell consisted of a 
Metrohm titration vessel (150 ml) with a specially designed lid. The vessel was equipped 
with a rotating disc electrode device of own manufacture as working electrode. Rotating 
disc electrodes with a surface area of 0.2 cm2 were prepared from pure iron rods 99.9985% 
(Johnson Matthey Ltd). The electrodes were moulded in epoxy, exposing only the circular 
disc surface. The potential of the working electrode was measured against a silver chloride 
reference electrode (Ag/AgCl, sat KCl, 197 mV vs the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE)). 
After each recorded sweep, the ohmic drop between the working and the reference electrode 
was measured and the potential was corrected with respect to this drop. A cylindrical 
platinum net was used as the counter electrode. All experiments were done at room 
temperature under a blanket of clean air. 
The iron electrodes were wet polished on 1000 and 4000 mesh Carborundum papers 
(Struers), rinsed in double-distilled water and immediately transferred to the 
electrochemical cell. The electrode was pretreated by a’cyclic procedure as follows: the 
scan was started at the corrosion potential, E = - 350 mV, E = E- E,,f. A sweep was made in 
a positive direction, with a sweep rate of 5 mV/s, to E = 600 mV, reversed to E = - 1000 mV 
and back to E = - 350 mV. The rotation rate remained constant at 50 rps. This procedure 
was repeated five times before the scan was recorded. 
Electrochemical measurements: basic considerations 
Electrochemical measurements in diluted solutions have to be made under consideration 
of the basic assumptions for the technique used. One item of interest is the migration. An 
approximate calculation of the current distribution in the most diluted solution reveals that 
less than 4% of the total current is carried by the reaction participants. Whether this is a 
sufficiently low amount or not is hard to conclude. Since the results follow the same trend as 
for the solutions with much higher ionic strength, the migration effect has been assumed to 
be of minor importance. A similar question arises concerning double layer effects. For a 
clean surface it is possible to determine the potential of zero charge, but with a surface with 
passive layers this is impossible. To estimate the quality of the results, independent 
corrosion measurements were made using a test rig where no electrochemical techniques 
were applied (coupon tests). Similar results were taken as evidence for negligible double 
layer effects in the potential region used. 
Coupon tests in stagnant water 
Iron coupons were exposed to double-distilled water with varying additions of hydrogen 
carbonate and calcium in the same range as for the PDS measurements. Three test periods of 
12-15 days were performed. The iron coupons were 22 x 37 x 2 mm3 and made of pure iron. 
They were wet polished on 500 and 1000 mesh Carborundum papers (Struers), rinsed in 
ethanol in an ultrasonic bath followed by rinsing in double-distilled water and immediately 
transferred to the beakers. The beakers were mounted in a water bath at a constant 
temperature of 30°C. 
The water volume was 400 ml at the start of the test. Each analysis of the iron content 
required between 0.5 and 10ml of water. This volume decrease was accounted for when 
calculating the final iron concentrations. 
446 A. Sander et al. 
Iron concentrations were analysed each day during the test period. Micropipettes, 200 
and 5000 11, were used to transfer water samples from the beakers. The accuracy of the 
pipettes was f 1% (normally 0.6%) and the reproducibility 0.3%. A Hach instrument (DR/ 
700 Colorimeter, Module 50.01) was used for iron analyses. The instrument gives accurate 
values between 0.02 and 5.0 mg/l Fe’+. In the present investigation the iron content never 
fell below 0.30 mg/l. Some samples had to be diluted to fit within the range of the analyser. 
At the end of the test the weight loss of the coupons was measured. 
Electrolytes 
Electrolytes (synthetic water) were prepared from double-distilled water and sodium 
hydrogen carbonate (NaHCOs, p.a.) in concentrations between 0.5 and 10 mM. Clean air in 
equilibrium with the electrolyte concentration of carbon dioxide was bubbled through the 
electrolyte for 30 min before each measurement to saturate the electrolyte with respect to 
air. To adjust pH, 0.1 M hydrochloric acid (HCl, p.a.) was used. In order to achieve the same 
chloride concentration in all experiments additions of sodium chloride (NaCl, p.a.) were 
made. Sodium was presumed not to influence the corrosion rate. Calcium was added as 
Ca(NO&. Different concentrations of nitrates were tested and showed no effect on the 
corrosion rate within this concentration range. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The uniform corrosion of iron in drinking \$,ater pipes 
As pointed out in the introduction, it is important to distinguish between water quality 
and corrosion rate. Although the total mass of corrosion products inside the pipes is a 
function of the corrosion rate integrated over time, water quality deterioration primarily 
depends on the precipitation and dissolution properties of the corrosion products. A 
common opinion is that hard water is less corrosive to iron pipes than soft. Copper pipes 
corrode more intensively in hard waters. 
Figure 1 is an example of a PDS for iron in air-saturated synthetic drinking water. On 
the anodic side of the corrosion potential the material passivates due to film formation. At 
E, (mV vs AglAgCI) 
Fig. 1. Potential dynamic sweep for iron in air-saturated synthetic drinking water, 0.5 mM HC03-, 
pH zz 8.3. Sweep rate 5 mV/s and rotation rate 50 rps. 
Iron corrosion in drinking water distribution systems 
Rotation rate vs cathodic limes current 447 
5 
Fig. 2. Rotation rate dependence for the oxygen reduction reaction on iron in air-saturated 
synthetic drinking water, 3 mM HC03-, pH z 8.3. Sweep rate 5 mV/s and rotation rates 10, 30, 50 
and 70 rps. 
the cathodic side the current approaches a limiting plateau for oxygen reduction. No 
rotation rate dependence was observed on the anodic side, while the oxygen reduction shows 
a dependence indicating a diffusion controlled process (Fig. 2). To estimate the corrosion 
rate the slopes of the anodic and cathodic curves were extrapolated to the corrosion 
potential. It was found that the diffusion controlled cathodic process did not affect the 
corrosion rate determination. Thus, the corrosion rate appears to be independent of 
diffusion layer thickness and water flow velocity. However, it should be noted that the 
corrosion rate estimations are uncertain due to difficulties in the determination of the ohmic 
drop in the solution. This leads to a slight spreading of the corrosion rate estimations added 
to the uncertainty given by the system conditions. 
The corrosion rate is shown as a function of total carbonate in Fig. 3. At each test 
concentration a wide range of corrosion rates was determined, but, as can be seen from Fig. 
3, the pH seems to increase with the corrosion rate. This implies that total carbonate would 
not be determining for the corrosion rate, instead certain components, protonated carbonic 
acid (H2C03) and carbon dioxide (CO& are determining. In the following the combined 
concentrations of protonated carbonic acid and carbon dioxide will be referred to as free 
carbon dioxide. In Fig. 4 the corrosion rate is shown as a function of the content of free 
carbon dioxide. A similar relationship, although this time expressed as loss of weight, was 
found for the coupon tests, Fig. 5. Coupon tests were under stationary conditions and hence 
somewhat lower corrosion rates were determined. As can be seen from Fig. 5 the data are 
presented in a logarithmic plot, which gave the best correlation, and can be anticipated for a 
component dependence in a kinetically controlled process. 
According to the siderite mode121 the buffer capacity is the most important factor for 
stable protective layer formation. No clear dependence on the buffer capacity can be seen 
from this investigation (Figs 6(a) and 6(b)) although the buffer capacity almost co-varies 
with the free carbon dioxide when the pH is decreased from 8.3. Of course this does not 
exclude siderite as an important corrosion product during film formation. The Langlier 
448 A. Sander et al. 
0,ia 
0,175 
0,17 
C 
5,165 
z 
5 0,16 
$165 
L 
.E 0,lS 
0" 
&,I45 
s 
0,14 
0,135 
0,13 . 10.1 
. 88 : !4 
: a: 3 . a,1 
0 0,5 1 I,5 2 2,5 
total carbonate (mM) 
Fig. 3. Corrosion rate estimations, using potential dynamic sweeps, as a function of total carbonate 
content for iron in air-saturated synthetic drinking water. pH-values are noted for each experiment. 
$ 0,18- 
s . 
E 0,17- 
g . . 
n .: . I . . . 
0,16- . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
0,131 .,.,I ,.,.I.,. 1 
-I,5 -I,0 -0,5 0,O 0,6 I,0 I,5 2,0 
Fig. 4. Corrosion rate estimations, using potential dynamic sweeps, as a function of free carbon 
dioxide for iron in air-saturated synthetic drinking water. 
Iron corrosion in drinking water distribution systems 449 
. 
. 
. 
20- . 
0 1 1 I 
W 095 14 1,s 290 
log W,+H,CO,), WW 
Fig. 5. Weight loss as a function of free carbon dioxide for iron in air-saturated synthetic drinking 
water. 
protective layers of calcitei4’15 would cause a corrosion rate dependence on the product of 
the calcium and the carbonate ion content and this was not observed (Figs 7(a) and 7(b)). 
Instead the highest corrosion rates are observed for the highest values of the product, due to 
the low concentration of free carbon dioxide in these measurements. (However, it would be 
possible to change the appearance of this plot by conducting other experiments. An increase 
of the free carbon dioxide content would also lead to lower corrosion rates for the 
experiments with high calcium and carbonate ion contents.) 
Calcium content is often referred to as an important factor for iron corrosion.14,23 In this 
investigation calcium affected the corrosion rate in very soft waters but, as can be seen from 
Fig. 8, at higher total carbonate concentrations the effect of calcium disappears. This agrees 
with the results discussed by Sontheimer et ~1.~~ and Fiksdal et aI.23 where calcite layers are 
observed in waters with low calcium and total carbonate concentrations. However, the 
explanation based on pure equilibria data does not seem sufficient. 
Instead, the corrosion rate dependence can be interpreted in terms of surface 
complexation. The effect of free carbon dioxide on surface complexation at an iron 
mineral has been considered elsewhere.24-26 A schematic representation of the surface 
reaction on iron is shown in Fig. 9. Free carbon dioxide acts as a proton donor at surface 
hydroxide sites. The hydroxide group will leave as water and new surface complexes 
involving hydrogen carbonate can be formed. This increases the solubility of iron ions and 
facilitates the formation of siderite through deprotonation of the surface complex. 
In the case of calcium several surface complexes are possible on the iron hydroxide 
surface. The most likely inner sphere complex is presented in Fig. 10. It is well known25 that 
surface complexation with free carbon dioxide causes dissolution of formed calcite. This can 
be a possible explanation for the absence of calcium effects in waters with high alkalinity and 
hardness. In soft waters the formation of calcium carbonate surface complexes can 
dominate over the iron carbonate surface complexes due to the thermodynamic properties. 
Thus, a calcite protective layer can be formed if the free carbon dioxide content is low 
enough not to cause calcite dissolution. A further conclusion would be that the linear 
450 A. Sander et al. 
. 0,16-, . 
3 
E .m. . 
-1 ;;I:. , , . , . ( 
0,0002 0,0004 0,0006 0,0006 
Buffer capacity, (M) 
(b) 
. 
. 
. 
. 
0 Ix;04 2~10~ 3x;04 4x;04 5~10~ 6x;04 7~10~ 
Buffer capacity, (M) 
Fig. 6. Corrosion rate as a function of buffer capacity for air-saturated synthetic drinking water for 
(a) iron electrodes during potential dynamic sweeps and (b) iron coupons in stagnant water. 
relationship in Figs 4 and 5 might not necessarily be extrapolated to a low free carbon 
dioxide content. This area would instead show a dependence on the calcium concentration. 
According to the surface complexation model discussed above one would expect a pH 
variation in the water from the coupon tests. This is also the case. In waters with high total 
carbonate content (5 mM), with and without calcium, a pH increase should be noticed. In 
the experiments a pH increase was observed corresponding to a hydrogen carbonate surface 
complex coverage of 20%. In the soft water (0.5 mM total carbonate content) saturated with 
calcium the calcium surface complex would lead to a pH decrease and this was also 
observed. The pH changes correspond to a surface coverage of 120%. The calculated figures 
should be taken as indications rather than absolute estimations. An ideally polished iron 
surface was assumed in the calculations and no notice was taken to pH variations due to 
Iron corrosion in drinking water distribution systems 
(b) 4.51 
zo- n 
+ , . , . I . I . I , I -. 
Op” 1,0X10’ 2,0X10’ 3,0x.r064,0x106 5,0x~Oa6,0x100 
Ca**C032m, (pW2) 
Fig. 7. Corrosion rate for (a) iron electrodes during potential dynamic sweeps and(b) iron coupons 
in stagnant water as a function of the product of calcium and carbonate ion content in the water. 
soluble complexes or other surface complexes than those mentioned. Neither has the 
formation of siderite nor calcite been taken into account. Doing so would yield higher 
coverage of the hydrogen carbonate surface complex and lower surface coverages of the 
calcium surface complex. In the case with soft water and no calcium little surface 
complexation would be expected. No change in pH was observed. 
Sontheimer et al.2’ stress the importance of slow corrosion product precipitation in 
order to form corrosion products well attached to the pipe wall, whereby less corrosion 
products are transported with the water and water quality problems at the consumers’ taps 
are reduced. The mechanism involves siderite formation, Looking at the corrosion product 
precipitation as a competition between surface complexes of free carbon dioxide and 
calcium ions, the former would be preferred according to the siderite model. In Fig. 11 
results from field measurements in a number of Swedish municipalities and one Norwegian 
452 A. Sander et al 
S-41 
2. I 
095 530 
total carbonate (mM) 
Fig. 8. The influence of calcium concentration on corrosion rate in water with different total 
carbonate content. 
Fig. 9. Possible surface complex at an iron oxide surface in water containing free carbon 
dioxide.““‘6 
Iron corrosion in drinking water distribution systems 453 
Fig. 10. Possible surface complex at an iron oxide surface in water containing calcium and with a 
low free carbon dioxide content.16 
80 r = . a 
=70 - 
8 c 
A 60 - 
8 . 
250 - ” 
3 
c 4o - 
2 
530~. . 
. . 
0 . 0’ I I I I I 
0 091 092 095 036 0,7 
Fig. 11. The percentage of iron samples exceeding 100 rig/l vs the ratio between free carbon dioxide 
and the calcium content of the water from field measurements in a number of Swedish municipalities 
and one Norwegian municipality. 
454 A. Sander et al. 
municipality are presented. The percentage of iron samples exceeding 100 pg/l are plotted vs 
the ratio between the free carbon dioxide and the calcium content of the water. All samples 
were collected in the same way and from similar sites in the distribution systems. The 
municipality with the lowest alkalinity (titrated carbonate) is marked in Fig. 11. Due to the 
low calcium content and high content of free carbon dioxide the water quality gives few 
problems with water quality deterioration. 
In a forthcoming paper theoretical calculations on the surface complexation of the 
species discussed will be presented. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A surface complex model is proposed to describe iron corrosion in drinking water. 
1. In waters with moderate or high total carbonate concentrations the surface complex is 
formed from free carbon dioxide. 
2. In waters with low total carbonate concentrations the surface complex involves 
calcium. 
3. A reversed proportional relationship between the logarithm of the free carbon dioxide 
content and the corrosion rate is observed. 
4. At low total carbonate concentrations the corrosion rate is dependent on the calcium 
content while at high total carbonate concentrations no dependence is observed. 
5. The ratio between the content of free carbon dioxide and calcium seems important for 
water quality deterioration where a high ratio gives the lowest iron concentrations in field 
measurements. 
Ackno,~,lrdgemmts-The authors wish to thank the Swedish Water and Waste Water Works Association for 
financial support and Associate Prof. Elisabet Ahlberg at the University of Goteborg for valuable discussions. 
REFERENCES 
1, E. Mattsson. Basic Corrosion Technology .for Scientists and Engineers, Ellis Horwood Limited. Chichester, 
U.K. (1989). 
2. M.R. Schock, Water Quulity and Treatment-A Handbook qf Comrnunit~ Water Supplies (ed F.W. Pontius), 
4th Edn, p. 997. AWWA, McGraw-Hill (1990). 
3. A. Kuch and H. Sontheimer, gl$ WasserjAbwasser 127, 621 (1986). 
4. A. Kuch, Corros. Sci. 28, 221 (1988). 
5. H. Sontheimer, W. Kolle and A. Kuch, Internal Corrosion of Water Distribution Systems (ed. S. Crnkovich) 
p. 62. AWWA Research Foundation, Denver (1985). 
6. A. Kuch, Internal Corrosion of Water Distribution Systems, (ed. S. Crnkovich), p. 88. AWWA Research 
Foundation (1985). 
7. V.L. Snoeyink and A. Kuch, Internul Corrosion of Water Distribution Systems (ed. S. Crnkovich), p. 1. 
AWWA Research Foundation (1985). 
8. E. Lind Johansson, Dissertation, Chalmers University of Technology, Department of Sanitary Engineering, 
Goteborg, Sweden (1989). 
9. Committee on Control of Water Quality in Transmission and Distribution Systems, J. A WWA. 76, 83 (1984). 
10. S. Reiber, J.F. Ferguson and M.M. Benjamin, J. AWWA. 79, 71 (1987). 
11. R.A.J. Pisigan and J.E. Singley, J. A WWA. 79, 62 (1987). 
12. L. Enander and B. Berghult, VATTEN 50, 7 (1994). 
13. Southampton Electrochemistry Group, Ellis Horwood Series in Physical Chemistry (ed. T.J. Kemp), p. 443. 
Ellis Horwood Limited, Southampton (1990). 
14. F.W. Langlier, J. AWWA. 28, 1500 (1936). 
Iron corrosion in drinking water distribution systems 455 
15. W. Stumm, J. AWB’A. 48, 300 (1956). 
16. T.E. Larson and R.V. Skold, J. AWWA. 49, 1294 (1957). 
17. M.R. Schock and C.H. Neff, Proc. 11th Water Quality Co& AWWA Research Foundation, Nashville, TN 
(1982). 
18. H. Sontheimer, W. Kiille and R. Rudek, Vom Wusser 52, 1 (1979). 
19. W. K611e and H. Rosh, Vom Wasser 55, 159 (1980). 
20. W. Kolle, Lapis 5, 20 (1980). 
21. H. Sontheimer, W. Ktille and V.L. Snoeyink, J. A WWA. 73, 572 (1981). 
22. R. Rudek, Dissertation, Universitat Karlsruhe (1979). 
23. L. Fiksdal and R. Blekkan, Vannkvalitet og korrosion pa” Sttipejern, Bl-1993-3, Institutt for Vassbyggning, 
NTH, Norge (1993). 
24. A. Wieckowski, E. Ghali, M. Szklarczyk and J. Sobowski, Electrochim. ACIU 28, 1627 (1983). 
25. P. Van Cappellen. L. Charlet, W. Stumm and P. Wersin, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 57, 3505 (1993). 
26. W. Stumm, Aquatic Chemistry (ed C.P. Huang, J.J. Morgan and CR. O’Melia), p. 1. American Chemical 
Society (1995). 
