Pergamon Vacuum/volume 47/number g/pages 1089 to 1092/1996 
Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved 
PII: SOO42-207X(96)00133-9 0042-207X/96 $15.00+.00 
Small pulsed electron-ion sources for radiation 
technologies and surface modification of materials* 
S A Korene@ and A J Perry,b a Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, 14 1980 Dubna Moscow Region, Russia; 
blSM Technologies, Inc, 9965 Carroll Canyon Road, San Diego, CA 92131, USA 
revised version received 20 January 7996 
A new type of small, combined pulsed electron-ion source for radiation technologies and surface modification 
of materials is reported. The source consists of a high voltage generator and particle emitter in the form of a 
vacuum diode. Explosive electron emission is used for production of electron beams and explosive ion 
emission for production of ion beams. The main parameters are the source output are: kinetic energy 200- 
700 keV, pulse length 0.3-1.0 ps, electron beam current 0.5-6 kA, ion beam current 0.1-200 A for ions of 
various conducting materials. The main applications of the device are presented. Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier 
Science Ltd. 
Introduction 
The development of advanced technologies based on the inter- 
action of pulsed high current electron and ion beams with the 
surfaces of solid materials is very significant at the present time. 
By way of example, major development work has been done in 
the US by the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and at 
ISM Technologies on MEVVA sources and their applications,‘,’ 
and in the Los Alamos and Sandia National Laboratories on 
high intensity beams.j In Russia, extensive work has been done 
in Tomsk4-” and Dubna7 on intense beam technologies. 
A survey of contemporary intense beam technology indicates 
the need for an ion source of simple and rugged design, and 
which is also inexpensive for commercial application. For real- 
world applications, it is necessary to be able to change the operat- 
ing parameters of the ion beams over a wide range. This means 
that the voltage generator has to be able to operate under different 
loads, and the ion diode offers this flexibility. The best power 
supply available for this purpose is the Arkad’ev-Marx generator 
which can operate under very different loads. In the present 
work which is oriented towards technological applications this 
generator is coupled to a pulsed electron and ion source based 
on explosive ion emission. 
General structure of the combined small, electron-ion source 
The combined pulsed electron-ion source consists of a high volt- 
age generator for beam, acceleration, vacuum diode and vacuum 
* Paper is based on that presented at the 9th International School on 
Vacuum Electron and Ion Technologies held on 14-17 September 1995, 
Sozopol, Bulgaria. and diagnostic systems. A schematic block-diagram of the elec- 
tron-ion source is given in Figure 1. 
I I ’ 1 
-- I-- 
Figure 1. Block-diagram of an electron-ion accelerator mounted onto a 
small sample chamber showing: l-the high voltage insulator, 2-the 
anode (plasma initiator), 3-the cathode (extractor grid), 4-a collimator, 
5-a current transformer (to measure the beam current), &shunt of 
current; 7-the film deposition on to a substrate in a small holder; 
8-vacuum chamber; 9-an oscilliscope. l-high voltage generator; 
IlLelectron~ion source. 
1089 
S A Korenev and A J Perry: Small pulsed electron-ion sources 
The pulsed high voltage generator is a Arkad’ev-Marx gen- 
erator with ten capacitor steps. The polarity is set on the high 
voltage rectifier according to whether electrons or ions are to 
be generated. The vacuum diode is very simple in design and 
comprises a stainless steel chamber 350 mm long and 400 mm in 
diameter, a high voltage insulator made from Capralon on which 
is mounted the anode (plasma initiator), a cathode (extractor 
grid), and various diagnostic devices for measuring the ion beam 
and total currents (integrating Rogovski transformer and Fara- 
day cup), and the pulsed voltage on the anode (a high resistance 
divider). 
The source can be operated in the following regimes: 
l generation of electron beams 
l generation of metal, dielectric or semiconductor ion beams 
l production of various films with ion or electron beam mixing. 
The operating ranges of the main parameters of the electron-ion 
source are: 
l kinetic energy-200-700 keV 
l pulse length--0.3-1 .O /*s 
l electron beam current--0.5-6 kA 
l ion beam current for different ions-O. I-200 A 
l ion types-all conducting (anode) materials. 
Production of electron beams 
Explosive electron emission is used to produce a beam of elec- 
trons, The value of the pulsed current emitted is stable, par- 
ticularly if a carbon fiber bundle is used as the cathode. A stable 
current is also emitted when using high temperature super- 
conductor materials as cathode, such as Y-Ba-Cu-0 or Bi-Ca- 
Sr-Cu-0, operating at ambient temperatures.* 
Production of ion beams 
Detailed discussions of the reduction of pulsed explosive emission 
to practice have been given elsewhere,‘,” so only the main prin- 
ciples are considered here. Referring to the schematic drawing in 
Figure 2, a positive voltage pulse is applied to the anode (termed 
1 I Figure 2. Schematic arrangement of the ion diode showing: l-the anode 
plasma initiator, 2--extractor, 3-anode plasma, G-atoms or molecules, 
5-ions, &substrate, 7-the film being deposited, or electron irradiated 
after deposition. 
1090 the plasma initiator) and a plasma is formed on its surface, and 
ions are extracted by application of a single positive voltage 
pulse. 
For the operation of a planar ion source using explosive ion 
emission, the intensity of the electric field E in the diode must 
exceed the threshold voltage Ethr needed for forming the anode 
plasma: 
E = KU/d > Ethr g lO’V.cm- 
where U is the voltage applied to the diode, K is the amplification 
factor determined by the initiator geometry, and d is the distance 
between anode and cathode. 
The main mechanism for maintaining the anode plasma is as 
follows: initially there is a condition of auto-emission from the 
heating by the ion current of points (micro-heterogeneities, on 
the surface of the anode) and electron emission from the cathode. 
The atoms in the vapor are ionized and form an anode plasma, 
which is the ion emitter, so that an ion beam can be extracted 
from it by applying a bias from the cathode, and thus forms a 
stable vacuum discharge. This type of ion emission is termed 
explosive ion emission. 
The formation of the ion beam from the anode plasma is 
accompanied by an intense emission of anode material, this 
material is emitted in the form of clusters and macro-particles. 
These components of the discharge can be condensed out to form 
a film on substrates located behind the cathode extractor grid. In 
this way, the deposition of films is possible with ion beam mixing. 
The diode can be operated in two regimes: 
Regime I. Maintaining the voltage pulse length less than the 
time required for the diode to be short-circuited by the anode 
plasma, and, 
Regime 2. Lengthening the duration of the voltage pulse so 
that it exceeds the time for short-circuiting by the anode plasma. 
In the first regime, the beams produced are primarily ions with 
only a limited amount of material emitted by the anode plasma 
initiator. In the second, there is a far greater amount of material 
emitted, and films of plasma initiator material can be deposited 
accompanied by ion beam mixing, as noted above. In this second 
regime, the significance of the ion beams is far less than in the 
first. 
The operating sequence of the source can be understood from 
the time diagram shown schematically in Figures 3(a)-(c) which 
illustrate the various emission processes. In the very first pulse 
beginning at t,, the anode plasma forms (on the plasma initiator), 
and the diode voltage U,, (Figure 3(a)) remains constant over the 
time tb taken for the diode to short circuit, During this time (i.e. 
in Regime 1 noted above) ions are formed from the anode with 
some erosion of anode material. and an ion current I,, can be 
extracted from the plasma by the cathode (Figure 3(b)) at a 
velocity V,. These first ions pass through the cathode extractor 
grid, and can implant and ion-clean the substrates located behind 
the grid. This cleaning by the first burst of ions enhances the 
adhesion of the coating. After the diode short-circuits (Figure 
3(c)) the voltage drops and the current increases to the full diode 
level I, accompanied by the explosive emission of material from 
the anode with a velocity V, (Regime 2 noted above). This com- 
ponent of the pulse length t, can be set, giving a total pulse length 
of t, = t,,+ t,. The emitted material passes through the cathode 
screen and coats the substrates located behind it. The second, 
and subsequent pulses, starting at t, continue the process with 
the single difference that the ion beam now irradiates the 
S A Korenev and A J Perry: Small pulsed electron-ion sources 
a) Diode voltage 
A First pulse 
Y _ \ \ \ i i L-___ 
+--4--4 Subsequent pulses 
\ \ \ \ i L____ 
t1 
A Implantation Ion beam 
Ion emission and cleaning modification 
Ib 
“‘.” v, . . . . .._ ..,... c’i-_/ :::::: v; .._.._ 
c) ,FFkled;rde 
Material emission 
Deposition 
Anode Cathode 
to i-4-J Figure 3. Time diagram of the processes occurring in the ion diode 
deposited film, modifying its properties. The adjustment of the 
pulse lengths t, and t, gives control of the ion/atom ratio during 
the film deposition process. Figure 4 shows emission charac- 
teristics of source in the ion diode regime. 
The kind of ion beams desired can be selected from amongst 
all metals and conducting materials, for instance conducting cer- 
amics such as titanium nitride TIN, superconductor materials 
such as Y-Ba-Cu-0 or Bi-Ca-SrCu-O. Films can be deposited 
on different substrates at any temperature compatible with the 
design of the deposition chamber. The speed of deposition 
depends on the parameters of the discharge circuit high voltage 
generator, plasma source and ion beam. As an example, the 
deposition rate of films from a rhenium plasma initiator (anode) 
is shown in Figure 5 as a function of the diode voltage. 
200 300 &xl MO 600 700 800 
Voltage (kV) 
Figure 4. Emission characteristics of the ion diode for typical materials 
showing the high current densities which can be reached. In these studies, 
the distances between anode and cathode, and anode and substrate were 
7 mm and 30 mm, respectively. The pulse length was 300 ns. The data 
are for ions of copper, aluminum, carbon and beryllium, represented by 
round, square, filled square, and triangular symbols, respectively. Time 
Applications 
This kind of universal electron-ion source is simple to operate 
and can be used for the surface modification of different 
materials, semiconductors, high temperature superconductors 
and metals, and for the electron beam post treatment of the 
films deposited with the device. The current directions aimed 
for industrial application include the deposition of films onto 
polymer substrates, and the deposition of hard, stable coatings 
for optical devices. 
Conclusions 
The explosive electron and ion source, based on the ion diode 
powered by an Arkad’ev-Marx generator, delivers very intense 
beams with ion beam currents in the range l-200 A. The control 
variables can be set in the ranges: voltage 100-700 kV, pulse 
length typically 0.3 gs, depending on the ion chosen. It can be 
used very effectively in the surface treatment of bulk materials, 
for the deposition of films with concomitant ion beam treatment 
1 I 
0 IM) ml 300 4co MO @al 
Voltage (kV) 
Figure 5. Dependence of the rate of deposition of rhenium on the voltage 
applied to the ion diode, geometry as in Figure 4. 
1091 
SA KorenevandA J Perry:Small pulsed electron-ion sources 
in the ion emission mode, snd for electron beam irradiation and 
surface fusion in the electron emission mode. 
References 
’ I G Brown, J Vuc Sri Technol A, 11, 1480 (I 993). 
‘J R Treglio. A J Perry and R J Stinner, Surf’ Coar Technol, 65, 144 
(1994). 
‘R W Stinnett, R G Buchheit, F A Greulich, C R Hills, A C Kilgo, D C 
McIntyre, J B Greenly, M 0 Thompson, G P Johnston and R J Rej, Mat 
Res Sot Sl,rnp Proc, 316, 52 1 (I 994). 4G E Remnev and V A Shulov, Proc 9th Int Cor~f BEAMS92, Wash- 
ington, DC, S/25, 1992. 
‘A Didenko, A Ligachev and I Kurakin, E@cts of particles beums 
irradiation on metals and alloys surface. Moscow. Energoatomizdat 
(1987). 
“Electron Beams in Technology,, G Mesyats (Ed.). Novosibirsk. Science, 
1986. 
‘S A Korenev, Nucl Instr Meth Phys, B80/81, 242 (1993). 
‘S A Korenev, Doctor of Science thesis. Dubna. 1994. 
“S A Korenev, Proc 3rd Int Corzf Energy Pulse and Particle Beam Modi- 
fication o/Materialr (EPM’89). Dresden, Germany, 1989. p 448. 
‘OS A Korenev, Rer Sci Ins@, V. 36 147 (I 994). 
1092 
