Pergamon 0025-326X(95)00151-4 Marine Pollution Bulletin, Vol. 32, No. 3, pp. 276-274, 1996 
Copyright © 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All fights reserved 
0025-326X/96 $15.00 + 0.00 
Petroleum Biomarkers as Tracers of 
Lubricating Oil Contamination 
TILMAN BIEGER*, JOCELYNE HELLOUt~; and TEOFILO A. ABRAJANO Jr* 
*Dept of Earth Sciences, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St John's, Newfoundland, Canada AIB 3X5 
~ Science Branch Dept of Fisheries and Oceans, P.O. Box 5667, St John's, Newfoundland, Canada AIC 5X1 
:~Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. 
This study demonstrates the use of tricyclic and 
pentacyclic terpanes, trace constituents of lubricating 
oils, as indicators of the origin of diffuse lubricating oil 
contamination in plankton and sediments around St 
John's, Newfoundland, Canada. Different types of 
lubricating oils and motor exhausts were found to 
consistently feature distinct terpane distributions. Differ- 
ences in the relative contribution of automotive and two- 
stroke outboard oils could be recognized in the terpane 
distributions of sediments and plankton from different 
areas. The ratio of durable pentacycHe terpanes to the 
size of the more labile unresolved complex mixture is 
demonstrated to be an indicator of the degree of 
weathering that oil contamination has undergone. 
Analysis of the terpane distributions of the entire range 
of refined oils and greases would enhance the use of these 
compounds as tracers of the sources of diffuse lubricating 
oil contamination. Copyright © 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
Approximately half of the lubricating oil used in engine 
crankcases is released to the environment, both through 
engine exhaust and through leakage and spillage 
(Environment Canada, 1991). This oil contributes a 
complex mixture of contaminants, most notably various 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), polychlori- 
nated biphenyls (PCBs), heavy metals, chlorinated 
solvents, antioxidants and other additives to the 
environment (GESAMP, 1993). Lubricating oils also 
contain trace concentrations of petroleum biomarkers, 
primarily cyclic terpenoids (Fig. 1), that are fossil 
compounds that have survived intact from the original 
biological material from which oil is formed. These 
compounds have been used extensively to correlate 
crude oils with source rocks and to identify the sources 
of individual crude oil spills (Peters & Moldowan, 
1993). 
This paper reports the use of the cyclic terpenoid 
biomarker fingerprints of refined oils and motor 
exhausts to indicate the presence of and trace the 
origin of diffuse lubricating oil contamination in 
sediments and waters around a small urban environ- 
ment, St John's and Conception Bay in Newfound- 
land, Eastern Canada (Fig. 2). Variations in the 
relative abundance of petroleum biomarkers in different environmental samples were found to be 
related both to the relative contribution of different oil 
sources with distinct biomarker profiles and to the 
degree of weathering that oil contamination has 
undergone. 
Materials and Methods 
Samples were taken of the primary hydrocarbon 
sources in the study area (mostly oils and engine 
wastes), of sediments (from St John's Harbour, from 
an urban pond in St John's and from various locations 
around Conception Bay) and of intermediate stages 
between sources and sediments (roadsweeps and marine 
surface water plankton). Utensils, devices and contain- 
ers used in the collection and handling of all samples 
were carefully washed with solvents to avoid contam- 
ination. The automotive oils (four fresh/unused and a 
pooled sample of used oil) were obtained from 
automotive service stations in the study area. Auto- 
motive muffler soots were collected directly from the 
inside surfaces of used mufflers. Roadsweeps were 
collected by sweeping roughly 1 m 2 of two asphalt- 
paved streets with a brush. Fresh outboard motor oils 
(three) were obtained from a commercial supplier, and 
general outboard motor exhausts were collected in the 
form of the water and surface slick from two outboard 
motor testing tanks. Hydrocarbons were extracted from 
all of these petroleum sources by simple extraction of 
appropriately sized subsamples with hexane. Plankton 
samples from Conception Bay were collected at various 
times (primarily during the spring bloom in May) using 
a 20 ttm hoop net. Bottom sediments (generally shallow- 
water sands/silts and deep-water muds) were collected 
using miniature piston corers. Hydrocarbons were 
extracted from thoroughly air-dried plankton and 
sediment samples by standard Soxhlet extraction in 
dichloromethane (O'Malley et al., 1994). 
Hydrocarbons were purified by one-step silica and 
alumina gel chromatography (Llorente et al., 1987) and 
were analysed by gas-chromatography/mass-spectro- 
metry (Hellou et al., 1993). Terpanes and steranes 
eluting in the hexane fraction (F1) were identified by 
comparison with literature data and were quantified 
using the intensities of the characteristic ion fragments 
with mass to charge ratios (m/z) of 191 and 217 atomic 
270 

Volume 32/Number 3/March 1996 
a. "~R 
H - Ct2H3s bo R=H - CloH21 
Pig. 1 Selected petroleum biomarker structures: (a) tricyclic terpanes; 
(b) pentaeyclie triterpanes or hopanes. 
7 ............. ~J~,/¢1 Conception Bay 
N I 1 48"00 
A 
47*50 
47*40 
Avondale, P 8 T~oosail St. Phillip's St John's 
Mundy 
Pond 
4T30 
Holyrood 
53*20 53*00 52*40 
Pig. 2 Map showing St John's and Conception Bay area (communities 
around Conception Bay shore were sites of rural samples). 
mass units (a.m.u.), respectively (Peters & Moldowan, 
1993). 
Results and Discussion 
All of the lubricating oil sources, soots and exhausts 
analysed contained triterpanes and steranes (Fig. 3). Outboard motor oils and exhausts contained a typical 
series of C27 to C35 pentacyclic terpanes (norhopanes, 
hopanes and extended hopanes), as shown in Fig. 3(b). 
Automotive oils, muffler soots and roadsweeps con- 
tained a similar assemblage of pentacyclic terpanes, as 
well as a series of C2o to C27 tricyclic terpanes that were 
consistently absent in outboard oils (Fig. 3(a)). 
271 

Marine Pollution Bulletin 
a. AUTO CRANKCASE OIL D 
E 
FG 
B C 
I,J,ml ........ U V 
W 
Llill b@ 
OUTBOARD MOTOR OIL 
W 
sT j 
. .kji¢ ,,u , X 
¥ 
C. URBAN ROADSWEEP 
B C E ST U V 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
} W 
i y 
i!~tld~, t j do 
CONCEPTION BAY 
PLANKTON U 
ST 
I,E FQ ' It~'ll 
, . : , . , W 
Y 
V 2 
I 2 
e. o==A,,o,o I f. tco,c=,T,o,=AY YI ! SE°,=E,T °ll SO=FAO SEO,=E,T o,,, 
T W I 3 
E S T X X 
FQ y 
A B C ~, Z , ', ti z 
gO 7~ 0[~1 -qO 100 I (0 120 C,Q 77 80 90 I00 I1'0 12'0 
TIME (rain.) TIME (mira) 
Fig. 3 Representative extracted ion (m/z = 191) traces of (a) automotive crankcase oil, (b) outboard motor oil, (c) urban roadswecp, (d) 
Conception Bay surface plankton, (e) urban pond sediment and (f) Conception Bay surface sediment. Peaks A-G are tricyclic terpanes 
from C23 to C2~. Peaks S-Z are pentacyciic terpanes from C27 to C34 as follows: S, ]8"(H), 21~(H)-22,29,30-trisnorhopanc (C27); T, 
17"(H)18"(/D,211~(H)-25,28,30-trisnorhopane (C27); U, 17"(H),211~(hr)-norhopane (C29); V, 17"(H),2]~(H)-hopane (C30); W, 
17"(-r;r),21~(H)-30-homohopane (C31); X, 1T'(/D,211~(H)-30-bishomohopane (C32); Y, 17"(/D,2il3(/D-30-trishomohopane (C33); Z, 
]7"(H),2113(H)-30-tetrakishomohopane ((]34); (Doublets in peaks W-Z are R and S ¢nantiomers). Peaks 1-3 are biogenic pentacyclic 
terpancs as folows: ], 17~(/I)-hopanc (C3o); 2, diplopten¢ (C30); 3, ]7(I-])-homohopane (C31). 
272 

Volume 32/Number 3/March 1996 
The biomarker distributions of intermediate stages 
between petroleum sources and sediments are shown in 
Fig. 3(c) and 3(d). Roadsweeps appear generally similar 
to automotive oil, featuring prominent tricyclic ter- 
panes. Plankton in Conception Bay, on the other hand, 
consistently contained almost no tricyclic terpanes, 
suggesting that the petroleum contamination in surface 
waters of the bay is predominantly derived from small 
outboard motors commonly used in the area. 
All of the sediments analysed contained some 
common recent biogenic hopanoids of bacterial origin, 
dominated by diploptene, C29-31 171](H)-hopanes and 
trisnorhop-17(21)-ene (Simoneit, 1986; Volkman et al., 
1992). In sediments from sites near populated areas, 
petroleum contamination could be immediately recog- 
nized by the additional presence of the same assemblage 
of hopanes and steranes found in the lubricating oils 
and wastes. Petroleum hopanes are completely absent in 
the deeper sediments in St John's Harbour and 
Conception Bay that were deposited before the advent 
(in the 1930s) of extensive motorized traffic (sediment ages from Ostrom & Macko (1992)). Harbour and 
urban pond sediments in St John's (Fig. 3(e)) feature 
abundant tricyclic terpanes, indicating, as would be 
expected, a primary input of automotive oil from the 
surrounding city. Tricyclic terpanes are also present in 
Conception Bay sediments (Fig. 3(f)), but are less 
abundant in this area than in urban ponds or St John's 
Harbour (Bieger, 1994). The reduced abundance of 
tricyclic terpanes in Conception Bay bottom surface 
sediments suggests the combined input of automotive 
oils and tricyclic terpane-poor outboard motor oils in 
this area. 
The abundance of terpanes relative to the size of the 
unresolved complex mixture (UCM) was found to 
increase with increasing degradation or weathering (i.e. 
from fresh automotive oils to used automotive oils, 
muffler soots, roadsweeps, urban ponds and rural areas, 
and, similarly, from fresh outboard oils to Conception 
Bay plankton and sediments (Fig. 4)). This confirms 
predictions from laboratory studies (Prince et al., 1994) 
that have shown these compounds to be much more 
10 - 
O 
o _ 
" I 
_= 
.o 
n, 4 - 
_ P = C30 pentacyclic terpane (hopane):UCM 1 
T = C23 tricyclic terpane:UCM I 
P 
AUTOMOTIVE OIL 
fresh ....... ~.- weathered 
s 
s S 
s ~ 
s 
o" P 
s ~ 
,P p 
.p T 
e 
P T" 
s ~ o ~° 
,'T .T'" .T "'T 
® o o o ® ® ® 
,, :3 OUTBOARD MOTOR OIL 
fresh - - - ~weathered 
s 
p" 
s 
s 
,P 
p, 
° 
~ T 
T.,-" T 
T o~ 
o o .~ ~- 
o ~ ~ ~ ~ - 
t- 
e~ 
g ~ o 
Fig. 4 Mean ratios of terpanes to the size of the unresolved complex 
mixture (UCM) in oils, soots, roadsweeps, plankton and 
sediments, showing resistance to weathering of cyclic terpanes. 
Tricyclic and pentacyclic terpanes were measured as respective 
heights of C23 tricyclic terpane and hopane peaks on m/z = 191 
a.m.u. UCM was measured as ion current at maximum of TIC. 
273 

Marine Pollution Bulletin 
resistant to weathering than other components of oil. 
The relative abundance of tricyclic terpanes increased 
less than that of pentacyclic terpanes, suggesting that 
tricyclic terpanes are less resistant to environmental 
degradation than pentacyclic terpanes. Thus, the 
relatively low abundance of tricyclic terpanes in 
Conception Bay sediments is likely to be the result of 
both the increased weathering to which these oil residues 
have been exposed and the input of outboard motor oils. 
Conclusion 
The presence of petroleum biomarkers in a sediment 
not only serves as a clear indicator of oil contamination, 
but the distribution of compounds present can actually 
reveal the primary sources contributing to a system, as 
different sources may contribute distinct fingerprints. In 
this study, variable inputs of automotive and outboard 
motor oils in different areas could be clearly recognized. 
The ratio of the abundance of cyclic terpenoids to the 
size of the UCM further reflects the degree of 
weathering or degradation that petroleum residues 
have undergone. Although more study is required to 
better understand the effect of weathering in altering the 
distribution of biomarkers of petroleum contamination, 
more comprehensive and detailed analysis of the 
biomarker fingerprints of the whole spectrum of heavy 
refined oil products would further enhance the utility of 
these compounds in tracing and determining the sources 
of petroleum contamination in the environment. 
This work was funded by the Canadian Green Plan Toxic Chemicals 
Program and the Canadian National Sciences and Engineering 
Research Council. One of the authors (T.B.) received support from 
the Government of the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador, and 
from the A. G. Hatcher Scholarship Fund and the School of Graduate 
Studies at Memorial University of Newfoundland. The authors also 
thank Dr Vincent O'Malley for providing several of the samples 
analysed. Bieger, T. (1994). Molecular and isotopic fingerprinting of aliphatic 
hydrocarbons in Conception Bay, Nfld. MSc thesis, Memorial 
University of Newfoundland, St Johns, Nfld, Canada. 
Environment Canada (1994). Canadian Environmental Protection Act 
Priority Substances List Assessment Report--Waste Crankcase Oils. 
Government of Canada. 
GESAMP (1993). Review of potentially harmful substances: oil, 
and other hydrocarbons including used lubricating oils, oil 
spill dispersants, and chemicals used in offshore exploration 
and exploitation. Impact of Oil and Related Chemicals and 
Wastes on the Marine Environment. XXII/4. Joint Group of 
Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution. Reports 
and Studies, International Maritime Organization, London, 
UK. 
Hellou, J., Upshall, C., Payne, J. F., Naidu, S. & Paranjape, M. A. 
(1993). Total unsaturated compounds and polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons in molluscs collected from waters around 
Newfoundland. Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 24, 249. 
Llorente, G. A., Farran, A., Ruiz, X. & Albaiges, J. (1987). 
Accumulation and distribution of hydrocarbons, poly- 
chlorobyphenyls, and DDT in tissues of three species of 
Anatidae from the Ebro Delta (Spain). Arch. Environ. Contain. 
Toxicol. 16, 563. 
O'Malley, V. P., Abrajano Jr, T. A. & Hellou, J. (1994). 
Determination of the 13C/12C ratios of individual PAH from 
environmental samples: can PAH sources be apportioned? Org. 
Geochem. 21(6/7), 809-822. 
Ostrom, N. E. & Macko, S. A. (1992). Sources, cycling and 
distribution of water column particulate and sedimentary 
organic matter in northern Newfoundland fjords and bays: a 
stable isotope study. In Organic Matter: productivity, accumula- 
tion, and preservation in recent and ancient sediments (J. Whelan 
& J. W. Farrington, eds), Columbia Univ. Press, New York, 
USA. 
Peters, K. E. & Moldowan, J. M. (1993). The Biomarker Guide-- 
Interpreting Molecular Fossils in Petroleum and Ancient Sediments. 
Prentice Hall, NJ, USA. 
Prince, R. C., Elmendorf, D. L., Lute, J. R., Hsu, C. S., Haith, C. E., 
Senius, J. D., Dechert, G. J., Douglas, G. S. & Butler, E. L. (1994). 
17a(H),2113(/-/)-Hopane as a conserved internal marker for 
estimating the biodegradation of crude oil. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
28, 142. 
Simoneit, B, R. T. (1986), Cyclic terpenoids of the geosphere. In 
Biological Markers in the Sedimentary Record (R. B. Johns, ed.), pp. 
43-99. Elsevier, New York, USA. 
Volkman, J. K., Holdsworth, D. G., Neil, G. P. & Bavor Jr, I-I. J. 
(1992). Identification of natural, anthropogenic and petroleum 
hydrocarbons in aquatic sediments. Sci, Tot. Environ. 112, 203- 
219. 
274 

