cQ@J __ __ li!B July 1996 
Materials Letters 27 ( 1996) 2 15-2 18 ELSEVIER 
Photochromic properties of a silylated spirooxazine in sol-gel 
coatings 
L. Hou a3*, H. Schmidt b 
a Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, Academia Sinica, P.O. Box 800-21, 201800 Shanghai, China 
’ Insitutfir Neue Materialien. Geb.43, Im Stadtwald, D-66123 Saarbriicken, Germany 
Received 25 July 1995; revised 20 November 1995; accepted 20 November 1995 
Abstract 
For the first time a silylated spirooxazine was introduced into organically modified ceramics (Ormocer) coatings by the 
sol-gel method and its photochromic properties are studied and compared with the free (non-silylated) spirooxazine. The 
results reveal that the silylation has little influence on the spectroscopic properties and the photochromic intensity of the 
silylated dye in Ormocer coatings is at the same level as that of the free dye, though the decolouration rate of the dye is 
reduced by the silylation and the decolouration exhibits a significant deviation from first-order kinetics which the free dye 
obeys. This is due to the dye-to-matrix connectivity. 
Kepvrds; Sylilated spirooxazine: Sol-gel: Photochromic coating 
1. Introduction 
A photochromic material is characterized by its 
ability to undergo reversible colour change between 
two states having different optical absorption spectra. 
This colour change is induced in at least one direc- 
tion, usually the colouration direction, by electro- 
magnetic radiation (e.g. UV light). Spirooxazines are 
well known as typical photochromic compounds 
which are based on light induced heterolytic cleav- 
age of the C-O bond, resulting in the formation of 
merocyanine, the coloured form, as is illustrated in 
Fig. I [I]. 
Since a photochromic compound in its crystalline 
state is totally inactive, then either for fundamental 
* Corresponding author research or for application development it must be 
dissolved in an appropriate solvent or dispersed in a 
suitable solid matrix to form a photochromic system. 
The interaction between the photochromic compound 
and the solvent or solid matrix strongly affects the 
overall photochromic properties of the system, i.e. 
photochromic intensity and colouration and de- 
colouration rates. Spirooxazines have been the sub- 
ject of many researches recently, mainly due to their 
inherently higher photostability than another kind of 
Spiro-compounds, spiropyrans. Moreover, it was re- 
ported that the photostability of spirooxazines can be 
significantly improved by encapsulating the dyes 
into sol-gel derived Ormocer (organically modified 
ceramics) coatings with both the photochromic inten- 
sity and the spontaneous thermal decolouration rate 
being almost the same as in ethanol solutions [2]. 
The successful utilization of sol-gel process in 
the preparation of solid matrices for photochromic 
00167-577X/96/$12.00 Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
SSDI 0167-577X(95)00287-1 
216 L. Hou, H. Sdmidt / h4cttrrkrl.s Lrttrrc 27 (I 9961 2 IS-2 I8 
Fig. I. Photochromic transformation of \pirooxarine. 
dyes is attributed to its unique advantages. It starts 
from alkoxide solutions at room temperature and the 
gel formed by the hydrolysis-condensation reaction 
of alkoxides can be cured at a temperature much 
lower than the decomposition point of the introduced 
dye. The pores within the gel are ideal cages for the 
dye molecules. It is also possible to modify the 
degree of freedom of the dye molecules to different 
extents by grafting them to the matrix network. In 
this paper, experimental results are reported for the 
first time on the photochromic properties of a sily- 
lated spirooxazine in sol-gel derived Ormocer coat- 
ings. The effect of silylation on photochromic inten- 
sity and decolouration kinetics is discussed in terms 
of the dye-to-matrix connectivity, which determines 
the degree of freedom of the dye molecules. 
2. Experimental 
Ethyltriethoxysilane (ETES) and 3-glycido- 
xypropyltrimethoxysilane (GPTMS) were used as 
starting materials at a molar ratio of 3 : 7 for the 
preparation of the Ormocer coatings. The molecular 
structure of the silylated (silane-substituted) spiroox- 
azine, in which the spirooxazine molecule is cova- 
lently coupled to a trimethoxysilane via the -CH?- 
CH2-CH,- spacer, is illustrated in Fig. 2. For the 
synthesis of sols for coating, appropriate amounts of 
ETES, GPTMS and half-stoichiometric quantity of 
water were first mixed by magnetic stirring for 10 
Fig. 2. Molecular structure of the silyleted spirooxazine - 
300 400 500 600 700 
Wavelength. nm 
Fig. 3. Absorption spectra of the photochromic coating: (a) before, 
(b) after UV irradiation. 
min, and then subjected to 20 kHz ultrasonic radia- 
tion at a power of 20 W for 20 min. Into the sols 
thus obtained = 8 wt% Triton X- 100 was added. 
followed by the introduction of the silylated dye and 
additional magnetic stirring for 1 h. Viscous sols 
were obtained in this way and used for the prepara- 
tion of coatings of different thickness by spreading 
on microscopic slides. 
3. Results and discussion 
The absorption spectra of the photochromic coat- 
ing before and after UV irradiation are shown in Fig. 
3. Since the decolouration rate is too high at room 
temperature to take the absorption spectrum of the 
coloured form, the coating was first cooled down to 
-20°C and then irradiated by the Hg-lamp to gain a 
saturated colouration, and immediately after removal 
of the Hg-lamp the absorption spectrum was mea- 
sured. We see in Fig. 3 an absorption maximum at 
614 nm and a shoulder around 570 nm in the upper 
absorption curve. which is a typical absorption spec- 
trum of the coloured form of spirooxazine. This 
L. Hou. H. Schmidt/Materials Letters 27 (1996) 215-218 211 
suggests that the silylation of spirooxazine has little 
influence on the spectroscopic properties. 
The photochromic properties of the coatings heat 
treated at 110°C for 2 h were measured using our 
computer-controlled apparatus in which a Hg-lamp 
was used as the UV source and He-Ne laser (633 
nm) as a probing light beam. From the colour-fading 
curves taken at various temperatures, the equilibrium 
absorbance at the photostationary state under UV 
irradiation, A A,, and the absorbance at the fading 
time (r) after cessation of UV light, A A,, were 
extracted and the relative photochromic intensity, 
AA,/AA,, were calculated. First-order plots for the 
decolouration of the photochromic coating at differ- 
ent temperatures were drawn as the log AA,/AA, 
versus t curves, from which the half-life time (f0,5> 
and the thermal decolouration rate (k) of the coloured 
form were deduced. 
Our experimental results show that the equilib- 
rium absorbance (A A,) of the photochromic coating 
containing the silylated spirooxazine when irradiated 
by the UV light at an on-surface intensity of 10 
mW/cm’ for 15 s reaches the same level as in the 
case of the non-silylated dye under the same condi- 
tions, implying that the photochromic intensity of the 
dye is not degraded by the silylation. The decoloura- 
tion rate of the silylated dye, however, is slower than 
that of the free one. In ethanol solutions both dyes 
exhibit a first-order decolouration kinetics with the 
t,,, at 225°C being 1.5 and 1.8 s, respectively, 
suggesting that silylation of the dye leads to the 
retardation of the decolouration process. In addition, 
the decolouration of the silylated dye in the sol-gel 
coatings is not a first-order reaction as is depicted in 
Fig. 4. 
The first-order plots are not straight lines and, the 
higher the temperature, the greater the deviation 
from first-order kinetics. In this case the following 
approximation method was employed to deduce the 
apparent t,,, and k from the decolouration curves: 
the time lengths between A A,/2 and AA,/4, 
AA,/8 and AA,/16, as well as AA,/32 and 
AA,/64 were taken as lo,s(a), f&b) and t,,,(c), 
respectively, and the corresponding k(a), k(b) and 
k(c) were calculated from these t,,5 values based on 
the assumption that first-order mechanism is obeyed 
in these relatively short time intervals to a first 
approximation. It was established that the decoloura- -i 14.6 “C 
-3.0 - 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 
Time(s) 
Fig. 4. First-order plots for the decolouration of the coating at 
different temperatures. 
tion rate of the silylated spirooxazine in the Ormocer 
coatings is considerably lower than the correspond- 
ing ethanol solution and undergoes a gradual de- 
crease with the progress of the decolouration pro- 
cess, as is reflected by the decrease of k, k(a) > k(b) 
> k(c), and the Arrhenius slope shown in Fig. 5. 
This result is strongly indicative of the different 
levels of degree of freedom by which the silylated 
spirooxazine molecules exist in the coatings. Owing 
to the involvement in the hydrolysis-condensation 
reactions of the trimethoxysilane, the spirooxazine 
molecules which are tethered to the trimethoxysilane 
may exist in different environments where the hydro- 
lysis-condensation degree of the three -OCH, 
groups in the silane might vary over a wide range, 
giving rise to different dye-to-matrix connectivity. 
3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 
1000/T(K) 
Fig. 5. Arrhenius plots for the decolouration of the photochromic 
coatings. 
218 L. Hou. H. Schmidt/Muterials Lrttvrs 27 f 19%) 215-218 
The degree of freedom of the dye molecules in the 
coating decreases with increasing connectivity to the 
matrix. The higher the connectivity, the slower the 
decolouration rate. Consequently, a gradually slow- 
ing-down decolouration process is demonstrated. 
4. Conclusions 
To conclude, the silylation of photochromic 
spirooxazine results in little influence on the pho- tochromic intensity, but leads to an evident deviation 
of the decolouration kinetics from first-order mecha- 
nism and gives rise to a considerable decrease in the 
decolouration rate. 
References 
[ 11 G.H. Brown, Photochromism - Techniques of chemistry. Vol. 
3 (Wiley-Interscience, New York, 197 I ). 
[2] L. Hou, M. Mennig and H. Schmidt. SPIE Vol. 2288, Sol-Gel 
Optics III (1994) 328. 
