Pergamon Corrosion Science, Vol. 38, No. 3, pp. 431-441, 1996 
Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved 
0010-938X196 $15.00+0.00 
0010-938X(96)00140-9 
THE DIRECT OBSERVATION OF ANODIC Bi203 FORMED ON 
BISMUTH IN AMMONIUM DIHYDROGEN PHOSPHATE 
SOLUTION 
K. SHIMIZU, K. KOBAYASHI, P. SKELDON,+ G.E. THOMPSON+ and 
G.C. WOOD+ 
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Technology, Keio University, 3-14-l Hiyoshi, Yokohama 223, 
Japan 
’ Corrosion and Protection Centre, University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, Manchester 
M60 lQD, U.K. 
Abstract-Using a relatively thin bismuth layer, sputter-deposited on to an oxide-coated, microscopically flat 
aluminium substrate, ultramicrotomed sections of anodic B&O3 have been prepared successfully, allowing direct 
observation of the film section in the transmission electron microscope. Various important features are observed for 
the anodic oxide film formed in ammonium dihydrogen phosphate solution. The film is essentially amorphous and 
consists of two distinct layers of different compositions, comprising an inner, pure oxide layer located adjacent to 
the metal and an outer layer doped with phosphate anions. The ionic conductivity of the outer, electrolyte-doped 
layer is considerably lower than the inner, pure oxide layer. Further, the effect of incorporated phosphate anions on 
the ionic conductivity of the oxide is considerably greater than that reported previously for amorphous anodic 
oxides on tantalum and niobium. 
Keywords: B. TEM, C. anodic films 
INTRODUCTION 
Since the pioneering work of Guritherschulze and Betz’ in the early 1930s anodic oxidation 
of valve metals has been the subject of widespread study because of its practical and 
fundamental importance.2d It is now generally accepted that the ionic transport processes 
involved in anodic oxide growth are considerably more complex than previously thought. 
For aluminium, tantalum, and niobium, where the anodic oxides are amorphous, oxide 
growth involves high-field-assisted, co-operative transport of metal and oxygen ions, with 
new oxide growth occurring simultaneously at the oxide/electrolyte and metal/oxide 
interfaces.5-10 Due to this particular mode of oxide growth, anodic oxide films on such 
metals generally exhibit duplex structures.“-” By taking the dissolution of oxide, if any, 
into account, in cases where the incorporated anion species are immobile, the proportion of 
the outer, anion-doped layer to the total film thickness gives the transport number of metal 
ions which is one of the key factors in understanding the microscopic processes of ionic 
transport during anodic oxide growth. Consequently, considerable attention has been paid 
previously to the duplex structure of the anodic oxide films. However, anion incorporation 
into amorphous anodic oxide films has not been investigated in detail other than for the 
films on aluminium,13-‘7 tantalum,11212~18 and niobium.11*19 
Manuscript received 30 June 1995. 
431 
432 K. Shimizu et al. 
In the present work, anion incorporation into an anodic oxide film grown on bismuth in 
sodium dihydrogen phosphate solution has been investigated by transmission electron 
microscopy of ultramicrotomed sections. Bismuth was selected because its anodic oxide 
films are known to be amorphous, and the field strengths required to give the usual range of 
ionic currents are considerably 10w,~’ only about 1 .O x lo6 V/cm at 1 mA/cm’ and 25°C 
compared with 6.2 x lo6 V/cm for tantalum’* or 8.2 x lo6 V/cm for aluminium under the 
same conditions2’ Such low fields for oxide growth on bismuth may lead to differences in 
the ionic transport processes compared with aluminium, for example. Thus, it is important 
to determine whether the growth of amorphous anodic oxide films on bismuth proceeds via 
co-operative movement of both metal and oxygen ions, resulting in the growth of oxides 
with the duplex structures similar to those observed for the films on aluminium, tantalum, 
and niobium. Ammonium dihydrogen phosphate solution was selected as the anodizing 
electrolyte because the phosphate anion is readily incorporated into anodic oxide films on 
aluminium, tantalum, and niobium; ‘l-l9 further, such anions do not undergo field-induced 
transformations upon incorporation into the thickening oxide. 
EXPERIMENTAL METHOD 
Thin bismuth layers, about 4 pm thick, were sputter-deposited on to one face of oxide- 
coated, microscopically flat aluminium substrates, of dimensions 50 x 10 x 0.2 mm, 
prepared in the usual manner.22 The use of thin, sputter-deposited bismuth layers on the 
oxide-coated aluminium substrates was essential for successful preparation of 
ultramicrotomed sections. With bulk bismuth, preparation of ultramicrotomed sections 
was particularly difficult, although not impossible, because bismuth was too brittle to be 
trimmed with a glass knife to a suitably fine size for final sectioning with a diamond knife. 
The sputter-deposited bismuth layers were anodized at a constant current density of 
5 mA/cm2 to 340 V in 0.1 M ammonium dihydrogen phosphate solution at 25°C. 
Preliminary examination of the anodized specimens revealed no significant differences in 
the interference colours between films grown on the sputter-deposited layers and 
electropolished bulk bismuth. 
Ultramicrotomed sections of the anodic oxide films formed on the thin layer of bismuth 
on the oxide-coated aluminium substrate were prepared in the usual way using an RMC MT 
600 XL ultramicrotome.23 Briefly, the anodized specimens were cut to dimensions of about 
2 x 10 x 0.2 mm and embedded in epoxy resin. The encapsulated specimens were trimmed 
initially with a glass knife and suitably thin sections, about 10 nm thick, were prepared by 
sectioning in a direction approximately parallel to the metal/oxide interface with a diamond 
knife. Ultramicrotomed sections, collected on to copper grids, were examined in a JEM 2000 
FXII transmission electron microscope operated at 200 kV. For elemental analysis by EDX, 
a nominal electron probe of diameter of about 10nm was employed to optimize spatial 
resolution and X-ray count rate. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
General observations 
Preparation of acceptable ultramicrotomed sections was found to be particularly 
difficult, even with the use of the thin, sputter-deposited bismuth layer on the oxide-coated 
aluminium substrate, due to poor adhesion between the anodic Bi203 and the bismuth layer. 
Direct observation of anodic B&O3 433 
b oxide 
I I I 
Fig. 1. Transmission electron micrograph of an ultramicrotomed section of anodic Bi203 sitting on 
a slice of aluminium. 
Previously, Mason and Young2’ have reported that poor adhesion between anodic Bi203 
and bulk bismuth allows the oxide to be readily stripped from the substrate with adhesive 
tape. For a similar reason, ultramicrotomed sections in which anodic Bi203 was attached to 
the magnetron sputtered bismuth layer were rarely generated. Fortunately, however, 
examination of a large number of ultramicrotomed sections revealed fragments of non- 
adherent oxide sections which were supported on sections of the oxidized aluminium 
substrate or the embedding resin, thus allowing direct transmission electron microscopy of 
anodic Bi203 for the first time. 
A typical example of the detached oxide regions is shown in Fig. 1. A section of the 
bismuth layer is observed as a dark region at the bottom of the micrograph. The anodic 
Bi203 layer is observed near the middle of the micrograph as a dark band of material. A thin 
section of the aluminium substrate, which supports the sections of anodic Bi203 and 
bismuth, is not observed clearly in the micrograph other than for the presence of dark 
extinction contours (indicated by the arrow). 
Various important features are observed in the anodic Bi203. Firstly, its duplex structure 
is immediately evident. An outer layer, originally in contact with the electrolyte, shows 
lighter contrast than the inner layer, which was originally attached to the metal. 
Additionally, the anodic Bi203 is of non-uniform thickness. At the local region indicated 
by the arrow a, the thickness of the oxide film is about 127 nm; however, at the local region 
indicated by the arrow b, the film is about 163 nm thick. Furthermore, an interesting 
correlation is evident locally between the thickness of the outer, lighter layer and the film 
thickness, i.e. the overall film thickness is reduced in local regions where the outer, lighter 
layer is of increased thickness. 
Analysis offilm sections 
Figure 2 is an enlargement of the boxed area shown in Fig. 1, revealing fine details of the 
appearance of the anodic Bi203. Approximate probe positions are also indicated in the 
434 K. Shimizu et al 
oxide surface 
I 
metal/oxide 
interface 0.1 p-n 
Fig. 2. Enlargement of the boxed area shown in Fig. 1. Probe positions are indicated where EDX 
analysis was carried out. 
micrograph where EDX analysis was carried out. Except for chatter bands, which run 
relatively periodically and perpendicularly to the direction of cutting, and for the 
background contrast from the section of the aluminium substrate (indicated by the 
arrows), both outer and inner layers of the anodic B&03 are relatively featureless and 
uniform in their contrast in the electron microscope. Further, selected area electron 
diffraction of the film section revealed only diffuse halos, indicating that the anodic Bi203 is 
largely amorphous, as reported previously.24 However, relatively dark regions, several 
nanometres in size which show diffraction contrast, are observed occasionally as indicated 
by the white arrows. At the present stage, it is not certain whether such crystalline regions 
are present initially or arise rapidly from electron beam irradiation in the electron 
microscope. Certainly the anodic Bi203 was found to be highly susceptible to electron 
beam induced crystallization. Additionally, and interestingly, the crystallization proceeds 
more readily in the inner, darker layer than the outer, lighter layer during observation in the 
electron microscope. 
EDX spectra obtained from probe positions 1 and 2 are shown in Figs 3(a) and 3(b), 
respectively. In both spectra, the 0 K(a,Q, Al K(c(,B) and Bi L(a,B) lines are observed as 
peaks at 1.05, 1.49, and 2.42 keV, respectively. Of these peaks, the Al K (a,B) lines arise from 
the aluminium section supporting the anodic Bi203. Additionally, in the spectrum obtained 
from probe position 1, which is located in the outer, lighter layer, the phosphorus peak is 
evident at 2.01 keV; such a peak is essentially absent in the spectrum obtained from probe 
position 2, located in the inner, darker layer. The data suggest that the outer, lighter layer 
contains incorporated phosphate anions and the inner, darker layer is comprised of 
relatively pure oxide; further, the incorporated phosphate anions evidently delay electron 
beam induced crystallization of the outer layer during examination in the electron 
microscope. 
In addition to the duplex structure associated with phosphate incorporation, close 
examination of the section of anodic Bi203 reveals a further layered structure which is seen 
Direct observation of anodic Bi203 435 
0.00 Energy (KeV) 4.00 
Fig. 3. EDX spectra obtained from the probe positions 1 and 2 in Fig. 2, revealing the presence of 
phosphate anions in the outer oxide layer of light contrast. 
only faintly at the magnification of Fig. 2. Figure 4, an enlargement of the boxed area shown 
in Fig. 2, reveals that the anodic Biz03 consists of two distinct layers of differing textures as 
opposed to the contrast differences reported earlier. A fine, bubble-like texture is observed in 
an inner layer of oxide which was located adjacent to the bismuth substrate. However, no 
such texture is observed readily in the outer layer of the oxide which was in contact with the 
phosphate electrolyte. The boundary between the two layers is indicated in the micrograph 
by the solid line which runs closely parallel to the boundary between the outer, phosphate- 
doped layer and the inner, pure oxide layer. Of particular interest here is that the boundary 
between the layers of differing textures is located above the boundary between the outer, 
phosphate-doped layer and the inner, pure oxide layer, i.e. the boundary separating regions 
of differing contrasts. 
DISCUSSION 
General considerations 
With the use of sputter-deposited bismuth on to designed substrates, ultramicrotomed 
sections of anodic Bi203 have been prepared successfully for the first time. Subsequent 
436 K. Shimizu et al 
Fig. 4. Enlargement of the boxed area shown in Fig. 2, showing the oxide layers of differing 
textures. A fine, bubble-like texture is evident in the inner layer of oxide. 
examination of the ultramicrotomed sections has revealed important new features of anodic 
oxidation of bismuth. 
The results confirm that anodic Biz03 is largely amorphous, supporting the X-ray 
diffraction analysis by Komorita et a1.24 It has also been shown that the anodic Bi203 
consists of two distinct layers of different compositions as observed with anodic films on 
aluminium, tantalum, and niobium. An inner, pure oxide layer separates the metal from the 
outer layer doped with phosphate anions from the anodizing electrolyte. The lighter 
contrast exhibited by the outer, phosphate-doped layer is thought to arise from the 
effectively reduced electron scattering cross-section in the electrolyte anion-containing layer 
compared with the inner, pure oxide layer. Considerable variations are evident both in the 
film thickness and in the extent of phosphate incorporation or, more specifically, the 
proportion of the outer, phosphate-doped layer to the local film thickness, d,,J~&,t. At the 
local region a in Fig. 1, where the local film thickness is about 127 nm, the dout/dtotat value is 
0.57; for the local region b in Fig. 1, where the film thickness is 163 nm, the dout/dtotal value is 
0.23. Such variations in the film thickness and dout/dtotat value are closely associated with the 
smoothing of the initially rough, sputter-deposited bismuth substrate during amorphous 
anodic oxide growth and the reduced ionic conductivity of the outer, phosphate-doped 
layer. 
The smoothing process of the initially rough metal surface during amorphous anodic 
oxide on valve metals has been discussed in detail by Pringle2* and experimentally verified 
for aluminium by Shimizu et al.*’ Briefly, the smoothing of the initially rough metal surface 
during amorphous anodic oxide growth is a consequence of the amorphous nature of the 
oxides and the oxide growth kinetics which are commonly described by the so-called high- 
field conduction equation: 
i = A exp (BV/h) (1) 
Direct observation of anodic B&O3 437 
where i is the ionic current density, T/is the potential across the oxide film of thickness h, and 
A and B are constants. The kinetics of anodic oxide growth represented by equation (1) 
require the anodic oxide to be of uniform thickness perpendicular to the local metal surface 
throughout anodic oxide growth. If the initial metal surface is flat, the current density within 
the growing oxide is uniform both laterally and perpendicularly throughout oxide growth. 
However, if the initial metal surface is relatively rough, the current density within the 
growing oxide varies both laterally and perpendicularly to the metal surface. This, coupled 
with the amorphous nature of the oxide, which allows the oxide to follow the gradually 
changing contours of the metal surface, leads to smoothing of the initial rough metal surface 
(see Fig. 1 in Ref. 25 and Figs 3 and 5 in Ref. 26). The most important consequence of the 
smoothing effect, relevant to the variation in the d,,,/d totai value, is that the thickness of the 
oxide grown at the oxide/electrolyte interface by the outward migration of metal ions is 
thicker in the oxide formed over valleys than over ridges associated with the rough surface, 
as observed in Fig. 1 at the local regions indicated by arrows a and b, respectively. The 
variation in the film thickness or, more specifically, the thinner oxide growth over the valleys 
where the thickness of the outer, phosphate-doped layer is greater, is due to the reduced 
ionic conductivity of the outer, phosphate-doped layer. 
Ionic transport during anodic Bi203 formation 
Before discussing the reduced ionic conductivity of the outer, phosphate-doped layer, a 
particular point of interest is the observation that anodic Bi203 consists of two distinct 
layers of differing textures. More specifically, the origin of the fine, bubble-like texture, 
which develops rapidly during the examination of the film sections in the electron 
microscope, requires further consideration. The development of the fine, bubble-like 
texture is explained on the basis that the bismuth layer was sputter-deposited in an argon 
atmosphere; argon is thus co-deposited with bismuth metal and subsequently, is 
incorporated into the anodic oxide; upon examination in the electron microscope, the 
argon agglomerates to form fine bubbles in the anodic oxide. EDX analysis failed to reveal 
the presence of argon atoms in the inner layer of oxide where the fine, bubble texture is 
observed (Fig. 3(b)), probably because of its insensitivity to detection of relatively small 
amounts of argon. For increased amounts of argon within the bubble-like texture, a peak is 
expected at 2.95 keV, as revealed previously for the film formed on sputter-deposited 
amorphous Al-Ta alloys.27 
Further investigation is needed to confirm the origin of the fine, bubble-like texture. 
Nevertheless, it is assumed here that the texture is due to the presence of argon atoms which 
are originally co-deposited with bismuth during sputter deposition; on this basis, the 
behaviour of incorporated phosphate anions can now be considered. 
It is evident that the anodic oxide growth on bismuth proceeds both at the oxide/ 
electrolyte and metal/oxide interfaces via outward migration of Bi3+ ions and inward 
migration of oxygen ions, respectively, as observed for anodic oxide growth on aluminium, 
tantalum, and niobium. Such a conclusion relates to the textured inner layer of the oxide, 
which is assumed to be associated with argon. Thus, during anodic oxidation, argon is 
incorporated into the anodic oxide as a result of film growth at the metal/film interface. 
Further, it is well known that argon atoms, incorporated within the growing oxide, can be 
regarded as immobile. Indeed, argon atoms have been used previously as inert and immobile 
markers for the determination of transport numbers during the anodic oxide growth on 
aluminium’ and tantalum.6 It immediately follows that the inner layer associated with the 
438 K. Shimizu et ul 
fine, bubble-like texture delineates oxide grown at the metal/oxide interface via inward 
migration of oxygen ions from that developed at the film/electrolyte interface by egress of 
Bi3+ ions. Of particular importance, the boundary between the argon-contaminated and 
argon-free layers is located above the boundary between the outer, phosphate-doped layer 
and the inner, pure oxide layer. For the oxide grown over the local regions where the sputter- 
deposited bismuth substrate was relatively smooth and the smoothing effect was 
insignificant the film thickness and dout/dtotat values are 158 and 0.33 nm, respectively. 
Additionally the boundary between the layers grown via outward migration of metal ions 
and inward migration of oxygen ions was found to be located at a depth from the oxide 
surface which is about 15% of the film thickness. Assuming a current efficiency for oxide 
growth of lOO%, these results imply that the transport number of Bi3+ is about 0.15 and 
that the phosphate anions incorporated into the anodic Bi203 at the film/electrolyte 
interface are mobile inwards under the field to give a dout/dtotal value of 0.33, which is greater 
than the fraction of the film thickness developed from outwardly mobile Bi3+ ions. 
Evidence has been presented recently to show that the incorporated phosphate anions 
migrate inwards in anodic oxide films on aluminium, tantalum, and niobium.18,‘9 Thus, 
similarities are evident between anodic oxide growth on bismuth and on aluminium, 
tantalum, and niobium. Now the remarkably low ionic conductivity of the outer, 
phosphate-doped layer is discussed. 
Conductivities of the compositionally differing film regions 
An important observation, which has not been stated explicitly above, is that the 
thickness of the oxide observed here, 127-168 nm, is considerably less than the value of 
273 nm calculated using the kinetic equation of Mason and Young*’ for anodic oxide 
growth on electropolished bismuth substrates in 0.1 M sodium hydroxide solution. Further, 
the difference in thickness values is too large to be explained fully by consideration of the 
reduced ionic conductivity associated with the outer, phosphate-doped layer. Thus, to 
investigate this behaviour further, the sputter-deposited bismuth layers were anodized at a 
constant current density of 5 mA/cm2 to 30 V in 0.1 M sodium hydroxide solution at 25°C. 
Variations in film thicknesses were immediately evident from the different interference 
colours evident for films formed on sputter-deposited bismuth layers in ammonium 
dihydrogen phosphate and sodium hydroxide solutions. The specimen anodized in 
ammonium dihydrogen phosphate solution exhibited a bluish-purple colour, whereas the 
specimen anodized in sodium hydroxide solution exhibited a faint, greenish-yellow colour. 
No significant differences were observed in the interference colours between the films grown 
on the sputter-deposited bismuth layer and bulk electropolished bismuth in sodium 
hydroxide or ammonium dihydrogen phosphate solution. 
Transmission electron microscopy of ultramicrotomed sections of the anodic Bi203 
grown in sodium hydroxide solution showed that the oxide is of uniform contrast in the 
electron microscope; unlike Fig. 1 no layered structure was observed, as expected in the 
absence of incorporated electrolyte species. Additionally, the oxide was of uniform 
thickness, about 221 nm, in a direction perpendicular to the local metal surface. The oxide 
grown on the sputter-deposited bismuth layer in sodium hydroxide solution is thicker than 
the film grown on the sputter-deposited bismuth layer in ammonium dihydrogen phosphate 
solution as expected from the difference in the interference colours. However, the oxide 
grown on the sputter-deposited bismuth layer in sodium hydroxide solution is still 
considerably thinner than that calculated (273 nm) using the kinetic equation obtained by 
Direct observation of anodic B&03 439 
Mason and Young. The reduced film thickness observed in the present work may result 
from the use of the sputter-deposited bismuth layer, particularly if it is of relatively low 
density. However, this does not appear to be the main cause of the difference in the film 
thicknesses, since the interference colours exhibited by films grown on the sputter-deposited 
bismuth layer and on the electropolished bismuth substrate in the same electrolyte were 
similar. Thus, the cause of the discrepancy in the film thickness has to be sought elsewhere. 
Mason and Young*’ determined film thickness by a spectrophotometric method, using 
interference minima at successive orders which occur at wavelengths near 400 nm. A value 
of 2.27 was assumed for the refractive index at 400 nm which Mason and Young did not 
consider to be reliable. Indeed, with n(400 nm) = 2.27 and using n(400 nm)/p =0.333 
obtained by Mason and Young,*’ a value for the density of the oxide, p, of 6.8 g/cm3 is 
obtained which appears to be very low; published values of the bulk density of Bi203 fall in 
the range 8.2-8.9 g/cm3.28 Recently, Komorita et 01.~~ reported a value of 8.3 g/cm3 for the 
density of anodic Bi203 grown in borate-glycol solutions. Thus, assuming p = 8.3 g/cm3 and 
from n(400 nm)/p = 0.333, then n(400 nm) = 2.76. With n(400 nm) = 2.76, the thickness of 
the oxide grown on the electropolished bismuth substrate, at a constant current density of 
5 mA/cm* to 30 V in 0.1 M sodium hydroxide solution at 25”C, is estimated to be 225 nm. 
Now, the agreement between the present result, 221 nm, and the revised value from Mason 
and Young, 225 nm, is excellent. 
From the thickness of the oxide grown in sodium hydroxide solution, the electric field set 
up within the growing pure oxide layer is estimated to be 1.36 x lo6 V/cm at 5 mA/cm* and 
25°C. Using this value and from the local thickness and the associated dout/dt,t,l value, it is 
possible to estimate the electric field, or more specifically applied field, in the phosphate- 
doped layer. To avoid various complications arising from the smoothing effect, local regions 
were selected where the sputter-deposited bismuth layer was relatively smooth. In such 
regions, the local film thickness and dout/dtotal values were 158 and 0.33 nm, respectively. The 
thicknesses of the outer, phosphate-doped layer and inner, pure oxide layer are estimated to 
be 52 and 106 nm, respectively. Since the electric field within the pure oxide layer is 
1.36 x lo6 V/cm, the voltage applied across the inner, pure oxide layer is thus 14.4 V. The 
difference in voltage, i.e. 15.6 V, is thus supported by the outer, phosphate-doped layer of 
52 nm thickness. Consequently, the electric field within the outer, phosphate layer is about 
3.00 x IO6 V/cm, which is considerably greater than in the pure oxide layer. Similar figures, 
i.e. 3.12 x lo6 and 3.44 x lo6 V/cm, are obtained from the local regions a and b in Fig. 1, 
respectively. 
For tantalum and niobium, it is well known that the ionic conductivity of the outer, 
phosphate-doped layer is lower than the inner, pure oxide layer. This has been interpreted to 
be due to incorporated phosphate anions lowering the dielectric constant which, in turn, 
lower the effective field, or Lorenz field, within the oxide which controls the ionic transport 
processes. 12*29 A broadly similar explanation can also be applied in the present case. 
However, it is evident that the effect of incorporated phosphate anions on the ionic 
conductivity of anodic Bi203 is considerably greater than for anodic Ta205 or Nb205 
despite the dielectric constants of anodic Bi203 and Nb205 being very similar-about 40. At 
the present time, when the precise composition of the phosphate-doped anodic Bi203 is not 
available, further discussion of the effect of incorporated phosphate anions on the ionic 
conductivity of the oxide is not possible. Determination of the precise compositions of the 
anodic Bi203 formed in various electrolytes, including ammonium dihydrogen phosphate 
solution, is now in progress, using Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy and X-ray 
440 K. Shimizu et al. 
photoelectron spectroscopy combined with chemical sectioning of the oxide in dilute 
sulphuric acid solution. These results, together with the full interpretation on the effect 
of electrolyte anions on the ionic conductivity of anodic Bi203 will be published in due 
course. 
CONCLUSIONS 
1. Ultramicrotomy has been employed to generate electron transparent sections of 
amorphous anodic Bi203 formed on magnetron sputtered bismuth layers in ammonium 
dihydrogen phosphate solution. 
2. The differently contrasted film sections reveal a duplex film structure comprising an 
outer region of film material containing incorporated phosphate species and an inner layer 
of relatively pure oxide. The differently textured film regions suggest that the amorphous 
oxide developed by egress of Bi3+ tons and ingress of O*- ions under the electric field. The 
suggested transport number of Bi3+ tons is 0.15, with the incorporated phosphate ions being 
inwardly mobile during film growth under the electric field. 
3. From comparison with films formed in sodium hydroxide electrolyte, the applied field 
in the inner region of relatively pure Bi203 is 1.36 x lo6 V/cm at 5 mA/cm2 and 25°C 
compared with 3.00 x lo6 V/cm for the outer phosphate-doped layer. Reasons for such a 
large variation in applied field in the different regions are currently being explored. 
Acknowledgemenu-The authors wish to thank Mr E. Akiyama and Prof. K. Hashimoto of the Institute for 
Materials Research, Tohoku University, for the preparation of the sputter-deposited bismuth layers. 
REFERENCES 
1. A. Gunthereschulze and H. Betz, Electrolytkondensatoren, 2nd edn, Herbert Cram, Berlin (1952). 
2. L. Young, Anodic Oxide Films, Academic Press, New York (1960). 
3. J.W. Diggle, T.C. Downie and C.W. Goulding, Chem. Rev. 69, 367 (1969). 
4. M.J. Dignam, Ionic transport through oxide films. Oxide and Oxide Films (ed. J.W. Diggle), Vol. 1. p. 91. 
Marcel Dekker, New York (1972). 
5. J.A. Davies, B. Domeij, J.P.S. Pringle and F. Brown. J. electrochem. Sot. 112, 675 (1965). 
6. J.P.S. Pringle, J. eiectrochem. Sot. 120, 398 (1973). 
7. J.P.S. Pringle, J. eiectrochem. Sot. 120, 1391 (1973). 
8. F. Brown and W.D. Mackintosh, J. electrochem. Sot. 120, 1096 (1973). 
9. K. Shimizu, G.E. Thompson, G.C. Wood and Y. Xu, Thin Solid Films 88, 255 (1982). 
10. J.P.S. Pringle, Electrochem. Sot., Ext. Abstracts 78-1, Abs. No. 198, Seattle Meeting, May (1978). 
11, J.J. Randall, W.J. Bernard and R.R. Wilkinson, Elecrrochim. Acta 10, 183 (1965). 
12. C.J. Dell’oca and L. Young, J. electrochem. Sot. 117, 1548 (1970). 
13. J.J. Randall and W.J. Bernard, Electrochim. Acta. 20, 653 (1975). 
14. K. Shimizu, G.E. Thompson and G.C. Wood, Thin Solid Films 77, 313 (1981). 
15. K. Shimizu, G.E. Thompson and G.C. Wood, Thin Solid Films 81, 39 (1981). 
16. H. Takahashi, K. Fujimoto, H. Konno and M. Nagayama, J. elecrrochem. Sot. 131, 1856 (1984). 
17. P. Skeldon, K. Shimizu, G.E. Thompson and G.C. Wood, Thin Solid Films 123, 127 (1985). 
18. K. Shimizu, K. Kobayashi, G.E. Thompson, P. Skeldon and G.C. Wood, Phil. Mug. B (submitted). 
19. K. Shimizu, K. Kobayashi, G .E. Thompson, P. Skeldon and G.C. Wood, to be published. 
20. I. Mason and L. Young, Can, J. Chem. 40, 9903 (1962). 
21. A.C. Harkness and L. Young, Can. J. Chem. 44, 2409 (1966). 
22. K. Shimizu, G.E. Thompson, G.C. Wood, Y. Kurima and K. Kobayashi, Thin Solid Films 173, 263 (1989). 
23. R.C. Furneaux, G.E. Thompson, and G.C. Wood, Corros. Sci. 18, 853 (1978). 
24. K. Komorita, H. Nishimura and A. Yoshida, Thin Solid Films 229, 156 (1993). 
Direct observation of anodic B&O3 441 
25. J.P.S. Pringle, Electrochinl. Acta 25, 1423 (1980). 
26. K. Shimizu, K. Kobayashi, G.E. Thompson and G.C. Wood. J. Surf. Finish. Sot. Jap. 42, 63 (1991). 
27. K. Shimizu, K. Kobayashi, G.E. Thompson and G.C. Wood, to be published. 
28. CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 4-44, CRC Press (1995). 
29. J.J. Randall, Electrochim. Acta 20, 663 (1975). 
