cm . __ Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B 116 (1996) 369-372 
__ 
@ 
ELSEVIER Beam Interactions 
with Materials S Atoms 
Excimer laser induced thermal evaporation and ablation 
of silicon carbide 
R. Reitano * , P. Baeri 
Dipartimento di Fisica, Unioersit& di Catania, Cot-so Italia 57, 195129 Catania, Italy 
Abstract 
It is well known that the ablation of material from a solid target exhibits a threshold behaviour. The ablation of material 
is usually performed at laser fluences significantly above the threshold and considerably high ablation rates are achieved. No 
particular effort has been devoted to the study of the low energy range, near the ablation threshold. This regime is of 
particular interest in what it might give insight on the reason for the presence of a threshold and then on the physical 
processes underlying the ablation itself. 
We have measured the ablation rate of silicon carbide single crystal targets induced by XeCl laser pulses as function of 
the laser fluence over a wide range, from below to well above the threshold. We have investigated the angular distribution of 
the emitted material through the measurements of the thickness of the deposited films; also, the morphology of the craters 
left in the irradiated targets as a function of the laser fluence has been monitored. 
We have modelled the surface heating and melting due to the absorption of the laser light, and calculated the surface 
temperature as function of time by using the well known “thermal model” often used for the laser annealing. Thermal 
evaporation from the liquid surface can then be calculated for each laser pulse energy and compared to the observed ablation 
rates. 
1. Introduction 
Pulsed laser deposition 
been demonstrated to be a 
amorphous and crystalline of silicon carbide (SIC) has 
promising tool to obtain both 
films [1,2] or even epitaxial 
films on silicon substrates [3J. 
In contrast with the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) 
method [4], Sic deposited by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) 
requires much lower substrate temperature and, being a 
high vacuum process, contamination is marginal. 
Although laser ablation is now used for many applica- 
tions, no clear description is available for the ablation 
process itself and, in particular, the presence of a well 
defined threshold has not been explained in detail. 
Silicon carbide, like many other materials, is ablated 
via the so-called “thermal sputtering” IS]. This mecha- 
nism consists in the melting and evaporation from the free 
surface. The loss of material by.vaporization is rate-limited 
by kinetics; an estimate of the vaporizing flux can be 
obtained from the Clausius-Clapeyron equation which 
gives the number of atoms per unit area leaving the surface 
of the condensed phase. 
* Conespondmg author. Tel: +39 95 7195 424, fax +39 95 
383023, e-mail: reitano@ct.infn.it. However, this simple mechanism predicts much lower 
ablation rates than observed. Clearly, some other mecha- 
nisms become effective at least above a certain energy 
threshold. 
In the present work we have measured the ablation rate 
of Sic induced by XeCl 15 ns laser pulses in a wide range 
of laser fluence, from just above the melting threshold up 
to, 10 J/cm’. We will show that two different regimes of 
ablation can be identified. These regimes are characterized 
by very different ablation rates and different morphologi- 
cal features in the craters left in the target. 
Modelling the vaporization induced by the laser pulses 
on our target can account for the low fluence regime up to 
the ablation threshold. On this same thermal basis, a 
plausible interpretation of the ablation threshold can be 
given. 
2. Experimental 
XeCl laser pulses, 15 ns duration were focused to a 
single crystal 6H-CYSIC target in vacuum (lop6 Torr) at a 
45” angle of incidence. The laser spot size was about 
1.5 X 0.3 mm with a Gaussian profile along the smaller 
dimension and almost flat in the larger one. A CW argon 
laser beam (A = 488 nm) was focused on the center of the 
0168-583X/96/$15.00 Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
PII SO168-583X(96)00072-9 
370 R. Reitano, P. Baeri/Nuct. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 1 I6 11996) 369-372 
XeCl laser spot and the transient reflectivity signal was 
monitored by a fast p-i-n photodiode. 
A different number of shots was used depending on the 
energy density; it ranges from 1000 for the highest ener- 
gies up to 100000 for the lowest. 
Silicon substrates were placed close to the target tilted 
45” with respect to the target normal as shown in the insert 
of Fig. 3. In this way we cover emission angles from 0 to 
90”. The average target-substrate distance was about 2 cm. 
The ablation rate (emitted material per laser pulse) has 
been evaluated from the depth of the crater created by the 
incoming radiation averaged over a large number of shots 
(1000 or more). The crater depth was measured by optical 
microscopy. Alternatively, we have measured the amount 
of material deposited onto the substrate, integrating the 
thickness profile of the deposited films over the whole 
solid angle of emission. We assumed a sticking coefficient 
equal to 1 throughout; redeposition of material on the 
target has also been taken into account. 
The deposited films were analyzed by 2 MeV He+ 
Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS). 
3. Results and discussion 
The laser heating of SIC shows qualitatively the same 
behaviour as silicon or other semiconductors. Above a 
certain threshold energy density, a large change in reflec- 
tivity (not shown here) was observed. The time duration of 
the high reflectivity phase increased with increasing en- 
ergy density. The threshold for the onset of melting was at 
a fluence of 1 + 0.05 J/cm2. 
A collection of data of the ablation rate as a function of 
the laser fluence is shown in Fig. 1. Data obtained from 
the evaluation of the crater depth are shown as circles, 
XeCl 15 ns pulse on Sic 
700 I I , , I , ) , , , , , , , , , 
T T 
0t 
0 2 4 6 6 10 
Energy Density (J/cm’) 
Fig. 1. Ablation rate of 6H-(YS~C as a function of laser fluence. 
0: data from material removal. A : data from deposited material. XeCl 15 ns pulse on Sic 
0 From removed material 
A From deposited material 
3 
Energy Density (J/cm”) 
Fig. 2. Same as Fig. 1 in a logarithmic scale. The shadowed 
region is the range of variability of the calculated thermal evapo- 
ration as detailed in the text. The dashed line is drawn to guide the 
eye. 
whilst triangles have been used for data obtained by 
measuring the amount of deposited material. The two 
methods are in good agreement. 
The presence of a threshold at about 2.0 J/cm2 is 
clearly visible from ihe figure; it is followed by a sharp 
increase up to 550 A/pulse, and by a saturation up to 
highest energy density employed (9 J/cm’). Both the 
presence of a well defined threshold and the saturation of 
the ablation rate are quite common. The latter can be 
explained by the shielding of the incoming laser light by 
the plasma formed in front of the target which prevents the 
surface to be reached by the remaining of the pulse. 
We will now turn our attention to the other characteris- 
tic feature of the ablation process, i.e. the presence of a 
threshold. Even just below the ablation threshold no more 
crater is left in the target, whatever the number of shots (at 
least up to 100000). Optical microscopy reveals a rough 
surface which averages to about zero and no ablation rate 
measurement is possible. By measuring the thickness of 
the deposited films we were able to greatly enhance the 
measurable range of ablation rates. In Fig. 2 we report the 
same data of Fig. 1 in a logarithmic scale. Very low, but 
still measurable, ablation rates are present down to the 
surface melting point. Thermal evaporation from a hot 
liquid surface is able to explain this range of ablation rates, 
as will be shown soon, and we will come to some conclu- 
sions about the presence of a threshold in the very same 
framework. 
We have calculated the amount of evaporated material 
per pulse as a function of the laser fluence by first 
modelling the surface heating and melting (standard heat 
flow calculation [6]) and then calculating the evaporation 
rate weighted by the surface temperature vs time profile 
R. Reitano, P. Baeri/Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 116 (1996) 369-372 371 
(not shown here). To do this, we needed the thermal and 
optical parameters of all the three phases involved, namely 
solid, liquid and gas. Some of these parameters (solid and 
liquid SIC optical constant at 488 nm) are not known with 
enough accuracy and we could get a better estimate by 
fitting the observed melting threshold and the whole melt 
duration vs laser fluence curve. The other parameters 
(thermal conductivity, melting temperature and enthalpy, 
etc.) are known or can be derived from the thermodynami- 
cal data tables [7]. 
The evaporation rate as a function of temperature 
(G(T)) is given by: 
where pv is the vapor pressure, M the molecular weight 
and T the absolute temperature. The vapor pressure can be 
calculated from the thermodynamical functions. Not much 
is known about the liquid phase; some uncertainty is 
present even on the concentration of the peritectic point 
which in turns reflects on the Gibbs free energy of the 
liquid phase; the heat of vaporization varies accordingly. 
Then, our estimate of the evaporation rate has to be 
considered as an order of magnitude. 
Two slightly different phase diagrams are reported in 
the literature [8,9] from which two different values of the 
enthalpy of evaporation (AH, = 490 kJ/mole and AH, = 
530 kJ/mole) can be derived. The results of these calcula- 
tion are shown in Fig. 2 as a shaded area. The limits of this 
region correspond to the two different enthalpies of evapo- 
ration. It is worth to notice that the data of ablation rate 
below -’ 1.6 J/cm2 are in good agreement with the 
calculated thermal evaporation. At higher fluences some 
mechanism, other than the pure thermal evaporation pre- 
dicted by Eq. (1) arises. 
Extrapolation of the concept of phase explosion [lo] 
proposed to explain the explosion of conducting wires 
heated by very intense current pulses may by applied to 
surface laser heating as well. 
The particles leaving the surface with their own veloc- 
ity exert a pressure on the liquid due to the recoil momen- 
tum; also, the vapour formed in front of the surface gives 
another contribution to the pressure. This pressure in- 
creases strongly with increasing evaporation rate. Pressures 
as high as 10’ Pa have indeed been measured in some 
cases [ 111. 
If the laser light is not shielded by the plasma, the 
liquid may raise its temperature well above the melting 
point. A point may be reached where the temperature and 
pressure reach the critical value of the irradiated material. 
At this point the liquid transforms with zero enthalpy of 
evapomtion to a highly compressed vapour phase and 
expands promptly mainly in the direction normal to the 
target surface; this gives the typical forward peaked angu- 
lar distribution of the emitted particles [ 121. : - 
2 0.8 - 
.z - 
.2 s -Q 0.6 - 
a - 
s - 
‘2 0.4 - 
E : 
k - R 0.2 - Substrate ) 1 
‘Lp (degree) 
Fig. 3. Normalized thickness of the deposited films as function of 
the emission angle 6 as define in the insert for three different 
laser fluences. 0: E=9 J/cm’; A: E=2 J/cm’; 0: E=l.l 
J/cm’. 
Unfortunately the critical point of silicon carbide is not 
known and then quantitative comparison of the prediction 
of this model is not possible. Just to give plausibility 
arguments we calculated the critical temperature. and pres- 
sure. Assuming the ablation threshold to be around 2.5 
J/cm*, we can then estimate the critical temperature from 
the heat flow calculations and the critical pressure from the 
velocity of the evaporating molecules; the results put the 
critical point of silicon carbide around T, - 5000 K and 
pc - 100 MPa. 
As a final test, we measured the angular distribution of 
the emitted particles. One would expect a strongly forward 
peaked distribution above the ablation threshold and much 
wider’distribution, approaching the cos 4 law, below the 
threshold. 
RBS measurements of the thickness of the films de- 
posited on Si substrates placed in front of the target in a 
geometry reported in the insert of Fig. 3, can give such 
information. We estimated the angular distribution of the 
emitted material by measuring the film thickness at differ- 
ent points corresponding to different emission angle 6 
from the normal to the target (see insert in Fig. 3). 
In Fig. 3 the thickness of the deposited films (normal- 
ized to the maximum value for each substrate) vs 19 is 
reported for three different laser fluences. The shift of the 
maximum of the distribution to larger emission angle is 
due to the particular geometry adopted. 
For the two highest fluences the angular dependence of 
the thickness is very narrow and, within the experimental 
errors, the two curves are equal. The maximum is close to 
0” and the FWHM is about 15”. This shape could be fitted 
by assuming a co&Y law of emission with n - 35. This is 
the typical angular distribution of the emitted plasma 
plume [ 121. 
372 R. Reitano, P. Baeri/Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 116 119961369-372 
For the lowest fluence, instead, a broad maximum at 
IY- 10” is seen and a FWHM greater than 35” is esti- 
mated. Although this distribution is not the expected cos 4 
law, it suggests that pure thermal evaporation took place; 
the deviation from the theoretical law could be ascribed to 
the roughness of the evaporating source. The formation of 
cones, typical of multi-shot irradiations [13], could infact 
shield the substrate from particles emitted at large angles. 
4. Conclusions 
In conclusion, we have shown that ablation of crys- 
talline 6H-ozSiC with XeCl laser pulses is characterized by 
two well definite fluence thresholds: at 1 J/cm*, which is 
also the surface melting threshold, pure thermal evapora- 
tion produces the epission of about 10-l A/pulse, it 
increases up to - 1 A/pulse with increasing fluence up to 
1.6 J/cm*. This is the onset of a different mechanism for 
which the ablation rate is rapidly increased to - 600 
&/pulse. A saturation effect, probably due to plasma 
shielding of the laser light, is observed at higher fluence. 
The process can be qualitatively described as the ther- 
ma1 evaporation from a hot liquid surface. When the 
evaporation rate and the laser fluence are high enough to 
raise the temperature and the pressure up to the critical 
point, an almost instantaneous transition to a highly com- 
pressed vapour phase occurs. This interpretation, supported 
by heat flow and pressure calculations, explain the low 
fluence regime up to the threshold for plasma formation. References 
[l] M. Balocch, R.J. Tenth, W.J. Siekhans, R.J. Allen, A.L. 
Connor and D.R. Holander, Appl. Phys. Len. 57 (1990) 
1540. 
[2] T. Zehnder, A. Blaner and A. Bachli, Thin Solid Films 241 
(1994) 138. 
[3] L. Rimai, R. Ager, E.M. Logothetis, W.H. Weber and J. 
Hangus, Appl. Phys. Len. 59 (1991) 2267. 
[4] J.A. Powell, D.J. La&m, L.G. Matus, W.J. Choike, J.L. 
B&show, L. Menderson, M. Yoganathan, J. Yang and P. 
Pirouz, Appl. Phys. Len. 56 (1990) 1942. 
[5] R. Kelly and A. Miotello, in: Pulsed laser deposition of thin 
films (Wiley, New York, 1994) chap. 3, p. 63. 
[6] P. Baeri and S.U. Campisano, in: Laser annealing of semi- 
conductors, eds. J.M. Poate and J.W. Mayer (Academic 
Press, New York, 1982) chap. 4. 
[7] JANAF Thermochemical tables, J. Phys. and Chem. Ref. 
Data 14 (1985) 636. 
[S] R.W. Olesinski and G.J. Abbaschian, Bull. Alloy Phase 
Diagrams 5 (1984) 486. 
[9] L. Kaufman, CALPHAD 3 (1979) 45. 
[lOI M.M. Martinyuk, Sov. Phys. Tech. Phys. 21 (1976) 430; 
Radio Eng. and Electron. Phys. 25 (1980) 100. 
[ll] C.R. Phipps, T.P. Turner, R.F. Harrison, G.W. York, W.Z. 
Osborne, G.K. Anderson, X.F. Corlis, L.C. Haynes, H.S. 
Steele, K.C. Spicocchi and T.R. King, J. Appl. Phys. 64 
(1988) 1083. 
[12] K.L. Sanger, in: Pulsed laser deposition of thin films (Wiley, 
New York, 1994) chap. 7 p. 199. 
[13] J.E. Rothemberg and R. Kelly, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B‘l 
(1984) 291. 
