Nuclear tns~rnen~ and Methods in Physics Research B 115 ( 1996) l&3- 172 
ELSEVIER Beam Interactions 
with Materials&Atoms 
The dependence of the energy losses of molecular ions 
and their fragments on the exit angle from a thin target 
A.A. Bednyakov, V.Ya. Chumanov, O.V. Chumanova, G.A. Iferov * , V.S. Kulikauskas, 
1.1. Rasgulyaev, Yu.N. Zhukova 
Insrirute of Nuclear Physics, Moscow State University, Moscow 119899, Russia 
Abstract 
Experimental results are presented on the exit angle dependence of the energy loss of Hz and OH+ molecular ions 
transmitted through a thin gold target in the energy range of SO-200 keV. We have not found any noticeable angular 
dependence of the energy losses of Hl ions in contrast to that for atomic ions. This result is in disagreement with a simple 
model of independent multiple scattering of the molecular fragments in the target. 
1. Introduction 
The dependence of the mean energy loss Ah(B) of 
swift ions in a thin film [l-5] on the exit angle is sensitive 
to the dependence of the energy loss on the impact param- 
eter in individual ion-atom collisions which is important in 
the development of the concepts of electronic stopping 
process [ I-51. 
Previous experimenta studies [6- 1 I] of molecular ion 
passage through thin films were concentrated predomi- 
nantly on the analysis of the probability of the transmis- 
sion without dissociation as well as of the energy and 
angular distributions of dissociation fragments which re- 
flect to some extent the influence of the Coulomb explo- 
sion and of the wake field on the passage of molecules in 
matter. The data on the angular and energy distributions of 
molecular ions transmitted through thin targets are scarce 
[ 12,131. In contrast to the case of atomic ions, it is not well 
undertow how for molecular ions the exit angle and the 
set of realized impact parameters correspond to the energy 
transferred to the atoms. A study of the dependence of the 
molecular ion energy loss on the exit angle after the 
passage through a thin film could be effective in under- 
standing the problem. In this paper we present the results 
of measurements of the energy and angular distributions of 
emerging Hz and OH+ ions and the distributions of 
protons which are the fragments of dissociated H: 
molecules. The angular dependencies of the mean energy 
loss deduced from these results (see also [14]) are ana- 
lyzed. 
* Corresponding author. Pax: +7 095 93908%; e-mail: if- 
~rov~~al9.npi.msu.su 2. Experiment 
The experiment was carried out with beams of protons 
and of Hz and OH+ molecular ions in the energy range of 
E,- 50-200 keV. The angular spread in the incident 
beam did not exceed 0.1”. The particles emerging from a 
thin target arrived at the entrance of a toroidal electrostatic 
analyzer (Fig. I) similar to that described in Ref. [ 151. The 
specific property of a toroidal analyzer is that the angular 
dis~bution of particles with fixed energy is ~nsfo~ed to 
a position d~s~bution in the image plane of the analyzer 
with the precision limited only by the aberrations of the 
ion optics and by the accuracy of the apparatus adjustment 
[15]. This distribution is measured in the angular range 
- 15” I; 0 s 15” by a position-sensitive detector with a 
chevron assemble of microchannel plates. Output signals 
from the position-sensitive detector after amplifying and 
converting by electronics were accumulated in a multi- 
channel analyzer and then this info~ation was recorded in 
a computer memory. Such a “multi-channel” registration 
allows us to reduce the target irradiation due to the possi- 
bility of the simultaneous measurement of the whole angu- 
lar distribution. Testing of the apparatus as described in 
Ref. [ 151 has shown that the angular and energy resolutions 
in the experiment were 0.1” and 0.5 keV, respectively (the 
latter is the FWHM of the peak in the energy dis~ibution 
obtained with the direct beam). 
The selfsupported polycrystalline gold films of about 
19 nm mean thickness were prepared with the method 
described in [I]. The film thicknesses were determined 
with an accuracy of about 2 nm from the energy loss 
measurements [ 1 I. The thickness nonuniformity evaluated 
from the energy spreading of a transmitted proton beam [ 11 
did not exceed f 2 nm. The electron microscopy study has 
0~68-583X/96/$15.~ Copyri@ 0 1996 EIsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
PI1 SOl68-583X(96)00280-7 
AA. Bednyakov et al./Nucl. 1n.r~. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 115 (1996) 168-172 169 
A 
Fig. 1. Scheme of the experimental setup. D,, D, and D, are the 
diaphragms of the collimator. S, and S, are the entrance and exit 
slits of the toroidal analyzer. MCP is the assemble of the mi- 
crochamrel plates and PSD is a position sensitive detector of the 
secondary electrons. AA is the axis of the rotation of the analyzer 
as a whole. 
shown an absence of film texture and sizes of crystallytes 
of about 5-10 nm. The films were mounted on grids with 
cell sizes of 0.5 mm, while the diameter of the beam spot 
on the target did not exceed 0.1 mm. The measurements 
with different films of close thicknesses did not reveal 
noticeable difference in the results. 
The vacuum was maintained at the pressure (3-5)10-* 
Torr. The beam current density on the target did not 
exceed lo-* A/cm*. The charge accumulated by the last 
diaphragm was used for beam monitoring. The time needed 
for the measurement of one angular distribution varied 
from several seconds up to nearly 10 min depending on the 
measurement conditions. It was possible to obtain the 
two-dimensional angular and energy distribution of the 
particles transmitted through the target by means of scan- 
ning of the analyzer voltage. The cross sections of this 
two-dimensional distribution gave us the angular distribu- 
tions of scattered particles at a fixed energy E or the 
energy spectra at a fixed angle 0. 
3. Results and discussion Angle (degrees) 
The measured angular distributions (examples for some 
conditions are presented in Fig. 2) as well as the energy 
distributions of molecular and atomic ions are of Gaussian-like shape without any structure. The following 
peculiarity is well seen in Fig. 2. The halfwidth of the 
angular distribution for outgoing protons, fJ1,rf(A El, in- 
creases considerably with the increase of A E (Fig. 2a) 
whereas that for Hz ions, 0 ,,2M, has a weak dependence 
on the energy loss (Fig. 2b). For better illustration of this 
fact we present in Fig. 3 the corresponding dependencies. 
A direct consequence of this fact is the increase of mean 
energy loss of protons and OH+ ions with the ejection 
angle, as it has been observed previously [ 1,3] for atomic 
ions, and an almost constant value of this quantity for 
molecular ions. This is also seen in Fig. 4, where the 
increment of the energy loss Q(0) = AE(0) - A E(O) is 
shown as a function of exit angle. In accordance with 
previous data for this energy region [6,10,13,16], the in- 
equality R = A E,/2A E, < 1 is fulfilled for the angle- 
averaged energy losses (A E, and A E, are the molecule 
08 
z! .o 
> 
-o 06 
Y .‘L 
2 E 04 
Z 
IO 
08 
i c-d 02 -2 -I 0 1 2 3 
Angle (degrees) 
g [ + 1963keV j 
+ 0 
I 2 
Fig. 2. The examples of the angular distributions of the molecule 
fragments (a) and of the Hz ions (b) for 100 keV/amu beam 
energy. The value of energy of detected ions is indicated for each 
example. 
II. PROJECTILE EXCJTAllON/CAPTURE/LOSS 
AA. Bednyakm et ai./ Nucl. Instr. and Met/z. in Phys. Rex B 115 ~19961168-172 
2 3 4 S 6 1 8 
AEIM (kevlamu) 
Fig. 3. ‘Ibe widths of the angular dis~butions as a functions of 
the energy 10s~ for fragments (a) and for the Hz ions (b). The 
results of registration of molecular ions for Hz molecular ions 
beam are denoted by open symbols while full symbols present 
corresponding tesults for the molecule fragments. The Hi beam 
energy was 200 (squares), 100 (triangles) and 50 keV (circles). 
and proton energy losses, respectively). It follows also 
from the present results that the ratio of the halfwidth of 
the angular distribution for Hi ions, averaged over the 
04 
-0 1 
I I 0 E 
0 2 4 6 s 
Ejection Angle (degrees) 
Fig. 4. The dependence of mean energy losses on the exit angle 
Q(6) for Hg molecular ions and their fragments. The notations 
are the same as in Fig. 3. The results for proton and OH+ beams 
are also presented, the ~srnit~ OH+ ions have been detected 
in the latter case. energy losses, ( e,,2M ), to that for fragments, (0,,2f), 
occurs to be approximately constant (0~ = 0.52 f 0.03) in 
the considered interval of incident energies. 
The two-step scheme of the molecular cluster transmis- 
sion through a thin film was proposed in earlier investiga- 
tions [6-91. The exponential decay of the incoming molec- 
ular ions occurs as a result of the electron loss or colli- 
sional dissociation at the first stage of transmission at 
about 1 fs. At the second stage the fragments move with 
broken molecular bond. The recombination of the frag- 
ments takes place at the exit from the target. In our 
conditions, the dwell time of the H, cluster i.e. the dura- 
tion of the ranges from 4.3 to 8.7 fs depending on the 
incident energy, therefore both stages of the transmission 
occur. In the frame of this picture and using some simpli- 
fying assumptions it is possible to consider the energy loss 
of molecular ions as a function of the angle of scattering in 
thin film. 
Let us disregard the interaction of two moving protons 
and consider their passage through the film as statistically 
independent. If the mean energy of every particle at the 
exit from the target is E&B) then the mean energy of the 
two-particle system, i.e. the “diproton”, is equal to E,(8) 
= 2&(e) in this case. Therefore, the dependence Q(0) 
(normalized to the ion mass) has the same shape for the 
“diprotons” as for protons. This model presents the sim- 
plest approximation for treatment of the transmission of 
the molecule as the two-particle system through a thin 
target. 
The model [8,9] for cluster interaction with matter 
presents a more realistic description of molecule transmis- 
sion than the previous one. While in the previous model it 
is supposed that after the molecule dissociation at the 
entrance surface their Fragments move independently, now 
their mutual Coulomb repulsion is additi~ally taken into 
consideration. In addition, the recombination of the frag- 
ments at the exit surface is considered more accurately, 
namely, it is taken into account that their relative velocities 
and coordinates should fulfill the proper conditions for the 
molecular 1 sus state formation. Making some simplifying 
~sumptions we have shown that the molecule fo~ation 
conditions lead to some flattening of the angular depen- 
dence, however the agreement with the experimental re- 
sults has not been achieved in this way. 
Hence, it seems that the simple models of the molecular 
cluster transmission through matter do not explain the 
behaviour of e(e) for the molecules received in the exper- 
iment. In this context it is reasonable to discuss some other 
factors which could be responsible for the observed effect. 
( 1) Strictly speaking, the proton scattering by the target 
atoms is plural but scarcely multiple since the effective 
number of collisions [17] in these conditions is relatively 
small (about 0.4). Therefore, the assumption used in [8] of 
completely inde~ndent scattering in the coordinate and 
momentum spaces is invalid in our case. 
AA. Bednyakou et al. / Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B I15 f 1996) 168- 172 171 
(2) The recombination imposes some limitations on the 
relative coordinates and momenta of the particles involved 
in this process [7,8], namely, the recombining fragments 
should have very close coordinates and velocities at the 
exit from the target. Therefore, the impact parameter distri- 
bution for the collisions of this set of particles with target 
atoms may differ from the same distribution for the soli- 
tary atomic ions. This circumstance can influence the 
correspondence between the Q(0) dependence for the 
molecular ions and that for the free fragments because 
these dependencies are determined by the abovementioned 
parameter distribution [3]. 
(3) The influence of the wake potential is clearly seen 
in the energy-angular distributions of the fragments of the 
diatomic molecules which are subject to the Coulomb 
explosion in the carbon foil at the energy of l-2 MeV [6]. 
Similar manifestation of the wake potential has not been 
observed in our experiment and this can be explained by 
the fact that the effect of Coulomb repulsion is weakened 
due to the relatively strong screening of proton charge by 
the valence electrons of the target and due to the plural 
scattering in gold at low energies [7,18]. However, the 
value of the induced potential at the first wake minimum 
U, is relatively high (about - 12.5 eV at the velocity 
v=2u a, where u0 is the Bohr velocity [19]). This is also 
an argument against the independence of the motion of 
fragments. Inclusion of the wake interaction in the consid- 
eration of the Hz cluster transmission through a thin gold 
film could destroy the similarity of the Q(0) dependencies 
for the molecules and their fragments which resulted from 
the assumption of the independence of the fragment mo- 
tion. This idea is supported by recent results of Monte 
Carlo calculations of the transmission coefficients for the 
0.1-1.0 Mev/amu H; molecules [20] in which the wake 
interaction occurs to be significant. 
(4) The ” vicinage effect” should be taken into account 
in the evaluation of the molecular ion energy losses [ 161. 
However, the interference component of the cluster energy 
loss, resulting in this effect, is predominantly due to the 
fragment interaction with the valence electrons determin- 
ing the energy loss at relatively large impact parameters 
b > I au. Therefore, the vicinage effect cannot directly 
influence the Q(0) behaviour which is mainly due to 
ionization of inner atomic shells at impact parameters 
b = 0.1 - 0.5 au [5]. 
The considered features of the H, cluster transmission 
process allow one also to comment on the shape of the 
angular distributions of molecules and fragments. ‘Ihe 
detection probabilities for “diprotons”, Fd, and for free 
fragments, Ff, at a certain angle 0 relate to each other in 
the independent motion model as F,(8) - F:(R). Suppos- 
ing the Gaussian form for F,(B) we receive the relationship 
between the halfwidths of the two distributions Q = 
8 ,,&3, ,Zf = I / fi. The experimental distribution for 
molecules is narrower than for the fragments but this 
difference is even more pronounced (a = 0.52). For inter- pretation of this result we should take into account, first of 
all, two factors. First is the manifestation of the Coulomb 
explosion which may result in the broadening of the 
angular distribution of the fragments. However, in order to 
make some conclusions about the consequent modification 
of the molecule angular distribution, we should take into 
account that the Coulomb explosion leads also to a spread- 
ing of the relative positions of the fragments at the exit 
surface that diminishes the probability of recombination. 
The second factor is the possible difference in the form of 
the energy distribution of fragments at different exit an- 
gles. This prevents the usage of a simple conversion of the 
angular distributions for fragments when modeling the 
recombination process, as it has been done for “diprotons”. 
The dependencies B,,,(AE) and Q(e) are the two 
characteristics of one two-dimensional angular-energy dis- 
tribution [2]. In this respect, the analogy in the tendency of 
the modification of the dependencies 28,,,(AE) (Fig. 3) 
and Q(R) (Fig. 4) in transition from fragments to molecu- 
lar ions is quite reasonable. 
The character of the dependence Q(8) for OH+ ions 
(Fig. 4) can be explained by a strong difference between 
the fragment masses. As a result of this difference the 
contribution of the H fragment to the total molecule energy 
loss is relatively small and, hence, the contribution of the 
0 fragment plays the decisive role resulting in the analogy 
with the case of atomic ions. 
A possible influence of the target thickness nonuni- 
formity on the experimental results should also be men- 
tioned. A stronger dependence of Q(0) for a nonuniform 
target in the case of atomic ions [21] and a decreased mean 
energy loss for molecular ions may be expected under such 
circumstances [22]. However, it is quite difficult to suggest 
any explanation why the nonuniformity could result in the 
suppression of the Q(0) dependence. 
In conclusion, the presented experimental results 
demonstrate a considerable difference in the behaviour of 
the angular dependence of the energy loss for molecular 
ions and for their fragments. It seems that this difference is 
not exclusively due to the statistical averaging over the 
broad energy distributions of the recombinating fragments. 
Probably, the specific selection of the trajectories at- 
tributed to the recombinating fragments and the influence 
of the wake interaction play some role in this phenomenon. 
The more detailed description of the cluster transmission 
through a thin foil which would account for the multiple 
scattering, Coulomb repulsion and the wake interaction of 
the fragments can be obtained using the Monte Carlo 
simulation of the particle trajectories which is in progress 
now. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors thank N.M. Kabachnik, V.A. Khodyrev, 
G.P. Pokhil, A.M. Melnikov and S.N. Scherbina for help- 
ful discussions. 
II. PROJECTILE EXCJTATtON/CAPTURE/LOSS 
172 AA. Bednyakm ef al./Nucl. instr. and Math. in Phys. Res. B If5 (3996) 168-172 
References 
[l] G.A. Iferov and Yu.N. Zhukova, Phys. Status Sohdi B 110 
(1982) 653. 
121 J.C. Eckardt, G.H. Lantschner, M.M. Jakas and V.H. Ponce, 
Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 2 (1984) 168. 
131 A.A. Bednyakov, G.A. Iferov, A.G. Kadmenskii, N.M. Nau- 
mova and Yu.N. Zhukova, Phys. Status Solidi B 140 (1987) 
[4] ~‘Auth and H. Winter, Nucf. Instr. and Meth. B 93 (1994) 
123. 
[S] L.L. Batashova, V.Ya. Chumanov, O.V. Chumanova, G.A. 
Iferov, A.F. Tuhnov, N.M. Kabachnik and V.N. Kondratyev, 
Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 33 (1988) 168. 
161 D.S. Gemmell, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 194 (1982) 2.55. 
[71 E.P. Kanter, P.J. Cooney, D.S. Gemmell, K.O. Groeneveld, 
W.J. Pietsch, A.J. Ratkowski, 2. Vager and B.J. Zabtanski, 
Phys. Rev. A 20 (1979) 834. 
[8] N. Cue, N.V. de Castro-Faria, M.J. Gailfard, J.C. Poizat, J. 
Remiliieux, D.S. Gemmell and I. Plesser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45 
(1980) 613. 
(91 D. Zaifman, Phys. Rev. A 42 (1990) 5374. 
1101 E. Ray, R. Kirsh, H.H. Mikkelsen, J.C. Poizat and J. Remil- 
lieux, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 69 (1992) i33. [l I] Y. Susuki, M. Fritz, K. Kimura, M. Mannami, N. Sakamoto, 
H. Ogawa, 1. Katayama, T. Non, and H. Ikegami, Phys. Rev. 
A 50 (1994) 3533. 
f121 H.O. Funsten, B.L. Barraciough and D.J. McComas, Nucl. 
Instr. and Meth. B 90 (1994) 24. 
f13] R. Levi-Set& K. Lam and T.R. Fox, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 
194 (1982) 281. 
[I41 A.A. Bednjakov. V.Ya. Chumanov, O.V. Chumanova, G.A. 
Iferov, V.S. Kulikauskas, 1.1. Razguljaev and Yu.N. Zhukova, 
Poverkhnost’ (Fys. Chim. Mekh.) 5 (1995) p. 102. 
11.51 R.M. Tromp, H.H. Kersten, E. Governs, F.W. Saris, R. 
Kondijs and W.J. Kifsdonk, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 4 
(1984) 155. 
[16] G. Basbas and R.H. Ritchie, Phys. Rev. A 25 (1982) 1943. 
[17] P. Sigmund and K.B. Winterbon, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 119 
(1974) 541. 
[IS] R. Laubert and F, Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 40 (1978) 174. 
iI91 P.M. EEhenique, R.H. Ritchie and W. Brandt, Phys. Rev. B 
20 t 1979) 2567. 
1201 NE. Capuj and M.M. Jakas, these proceedings (ICACS-I6), 
Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B I15 (1996) 146. 
[211 NE. Capuj, J.C. Eekardt, G.H. Lantschner and N. Arista, 
Phys. Rev. A 36 (1987) 3715. 
1221 M.M. Jakas and N.E. Capuj, Phys. Rev. A 40 (1989) 7369. 
