Pergamon Vacuum/volume 47lnumber 5lpages 437 to 44311996 
Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved 
0042-207x(95Mo258-8 0042-207X/96 $15.00+.00 
Damage to Si substrates during SiO, etching: 
Opportunities of subsequent removal by 
optimized cleaning procedures 
H H Richter, A Wolff, K Blum, K Hoeppner, D Kriiger and R Sorge, lnstitut fur Halbleiterphysik, 
W-Korsing-Str 2, D- 15230 Frankfurt (Oder), Germany 
received 1 October 7995 
Surface residues present at the surface and in the near surface region of Si substrates after reactive ion 
etching (R/E) of SiO, on Si with CHF&F, were investigated with Auger electron spectroscopy and atomic 
force microscopy. A thin fluorocarbon film was found to develop on all etched samples. The efficiency of 
different ex situ cleaning procedures was examined. A cleaning treatment without Si consumption was unable 
to remove the residue layer in the required manner. In contrast, post-RIE treatments characterized by 
oxidation/SiO, wet etch, respectively, by a Cl,-N, RIE step yield surfaces suitable for further device processing. 
This was confirmed by capacitance-voltage (C-V) and breakdown field measurements (E,,) at metal-oxide- 
semiconductor (MOS) capacitors. The results demonstrate, there is no universal post-RIE cleaning treatment 
for damage elimination, but optimizedprocedures with regard to special technological demands are realizable. 
Introduction 
Reactive ion etching (RIE) is a key process step in microelectronic 
integrated circuit fabrication. However, it has been known that 
RIE can cause damage and contamination effects in exposed 
semiconductor materials leading to degrade the performance and 
yields of the final devices.’ 3 
Damage is often inherent in these dry etch processes. The ion 
bombardment can cause bonding damage in semiconductors and 
insulators. The presence of UV radiation is an additional cause 
of such damage in insulating materials. Contamination resulting 
from the etch process is also thought of as damage, including 
metallic impurities from the etch chamber and the presence of 
residue layers formed by reactant species and reaction products. 
A general model of silicon surfaces after a conventional RIE 
process has been proposed by Fonash.4 It describes the damage 
and contamination effects on silicon substrates during contact 
hole etching in Si02. The damage produced can be considered to 
lie in three layers: a residual layer on the top of the substrate, 
followed by a heavy lattice-damage film, and a region of light 
substrate damage. The near surface region can be permeated by 
impurities such as carbon and hydrogen. The residue polymer 
film has been studied by different diagnostic techniques such as 
Auger electron spectroscopy (AES),’ secondary ion mass spec- 
troscopy (SIMS),6 and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).’ 
In general, there are three trends to get the problem “damage 
and contamination” under control: first, there has been much 
discussion of alternative plasma sources, such as electron cyclo- 
tron resonance (ECR) plasma etchers or inductively coupled rf plasma (ICP) sources. These sources seem to reduce at least some 
types of damage. On the other hand, the potential for charging 
damage may increase with these new sources due to the higher 
ion fluxes, UV photon and X-ray fluxes.’ 
A second opportunity for damage reduction may be to choose 
a cleaner, simpler etch chemistry. This means a renunciation of 
passivating gases for profile control. The change from con- 
ventional gas mixtures to new bromine or iodine etch chemistries 
has the disadvantage that these gases are often extremely corros- 
ive. At this time, it does not appear as if the SiOZ etch process 
would benefit from the use of alternative gas chemistries. CHF3, 
combined with 02, C2F, or CF4, is still the most common oxide 
etchant because it provides high selectivity to silicon. However, 
the search for suitable etch gases with a smaller ozone depleting 
potential is continued. 
The third approach to damage control is based on the fact that 
dry etch damage may not necessarily cause device damage, i.e. a 
degradation in performance of the final electronic device. It 
depends not only on the device structure but also on the process 
technology. Hence, the removal of dry etch damage in subsequent 
annealing processing steps is a promising procedure in tech- 
nological practice. 
But the large number of dry processing steps in integrated 
circuit manufacturing preclude the approach to follow each criti- 
cal dry etching process with a damage healing step. This is not 
compatible with the process complexity and increases the unde- 
sirable thermal stress of future low thermal budget integrated 
circuits drastically. Moreover, such annealing steps are only 
437 
H H Richter et a/: Damage to Si substrates 
effective if the contamination layer has to be removed. Therefore, All of these samples (RIE exposed wafers and wet etched 
surface cleaning plays an important role in semiconductor fab- reference wafers) were then submitted to a conventional plasma 
rication and processing. ashing process (0,/N,) in a barrel reactor. 
The investigations reported in this paper were focused on a 
highly selective SiO,-to-Si (higher than 15: 1 etch rate ratio) reac- 
tive ion etch process in a CHF,/C,F, plasma. By means of this 
widely studied’,” contact hole etch process the efficiency of some 
cleaning procedures for removal of contamination and damage 
was examined. The aim of this study was threefold: Cleaning procedures. After the barrel reactor process step, the 
wafers were subjected to one of different cleaning procedures and 
subsequently given chemical, structural, and electrical charac- 
terization. The post-RIE procedures evaluated for their ability 
to yield device-quality surfaces were 
To determine the state of a Si surface under overetch (Si02 
removed) conditions by using a variety of surface analytical 
techniques, including AES and atomic force microscopy 
(AFM). 
Investigations of different ex situ cleaning procedures (with 
and without “Si consumption”) for removing of con- 
tamination effects. 
To analyse cleaning procedures that remove not only the con- 
tamination, but also remove the damage, an electrical charac- 
terization using capacitance-voltage (C-V) and breakdown 
field measurements (.&,) was performed. 
Especially, a prospective generalization of the latter results could 
be of important significance. Thus, needless critical annealing 
procedures entailing thermal stress can be replaced by effective 
cleaning steps in the technological process of integrated circuit 
fabrication. 
Experimental 
Samples. The Si wafers used were B-doped, with 6-S Qcm resis- 
tivity and (100) orientation. A blanket wet oxide about 600 nm 
thick was grown on all these 4 in. wafers at 1000°C after a 
standard acid/base cleaning process. 
Dry etching. After oxidation, the wafers were exposed to the 
CHF&F6 (10: 1) RIE process, performed in a commercial reac- 
tor (LAM 384T) operated in the rf diode mode. The applied rf 
power (13.56 MHz) was 300 W (1.7 Wcm-‘) and the chamber 
pressure was 20 Pa. The self-bias voltage was ~800 V. These 
conditions yielded a Si02 etch rate of x470 nm min-‘. End-point 
detection of the oxide film was monitored using an optical system, 
consisting of six designated wavelength filters and one neutral 
density filter. For all experiments, an overetch condition of 25% 
was used corresponding to approximately 20 s of silicon etching 
time. 
In this study, the status of the Si surfaces produced by this 
CHF,/C2F6 RIE exposure was already compared to the status of 
the Si surfaces of reference wafers. For the controls, the oxide of 
the reference wafers was removed by wet etching with buffered 
oxide etchant (BOE) [H*O: NH,F: HF ( = 1: 85: 14)]. A procedure without Si removal, consisted of standard 
“RCA” cleanup. 
A procedure with Si removal, composed of standard “RCA” 
cleanup/diluted HF solution dip/Si wet etch (TMAH). 
A procedure with Si removal, composed of standard “RCA” 
cleanup/oxidation/Si0, wet etch. 
A procedure with Si removal, composed of standard “RCA” 
cleanup/ Cl,/Nz RIE process. 
The last variant, a dry cleaning technique using plasma is attract- 
ive because of its compatibility with cluster tools and the ability 
to precisely control of dimensions. Moreover, this procedure is 
characterized by a small thermal stress. All procedures are defined 
in Table 1. 
Surface diagnostics. After every process step (initial cleaning, wet 
oxidation, dry etching, plasma ashing, and post-RIE cleaning 
treatment), a few of the wafers (reference wafers, respectively) 
were reserved for analytical characterization. 
Auger electron spectroscopy using a “PHI 670 Ndnoprobe” 
with a field emission gun was employed to characterize these 
samples. The analysis was carried out by means of a 10 keV, 
10 nA electron beam scanned over a 100 x 100 pm2 area. For 
sputtering a 1 keV argon ion beam scanned over 1 x 1 m2 at 55” 
ion beam angle to sample normal was used. Auger spectra were 
obtained by means of a cylindrical mirror analyser (CMA) whose 
relative energy resolution AE/E is 0.4%. The intensities of the 
Si-LVV, Si-KLL, O-KLL, Cl-LVV, F-KLL and C-KLL tran- 
sitions were analysed. To reduce the possible influence of an air 
contact of the samples after RIE, the time of the air contact was 
reduced to several minutes. Nevertheless, this air contact hinders 
an exact interpretation of the origin for C- and O-peaks. 
The atomic force microscopy technique using “NanoScope III 
(Dimension 5000)” was employed to characterize the mor- 
phology with sufficient high lateral and vertical resolution. The 
measurements were realized an the dynamic tapping mode using 
silicon tips with radii < 100 A. 
Electrical characterization. The characterization was further aug- 
mented by an electrical evaluation of the near-surface region. In 
Table 1. Post-RIE cleaning treatments 
Name 
“RCA” cleanup 
“RCA” cleanup/HF dip/Si wet etch 
“RCA” cleanup/oxidation/ 
SiOl wet etch 
“RCA” cleanup/CL/N, RIE process Procedure 
Hot H2S0,/H20, piranha clean followed by SCljSC2 
Hot H,SO,JH,O, clean followed by SCljSC2, 0.4% HF dip for 60 s 
and then Si etch using tetramethylamoniumhydroxid (TMAH) 
Hot H,S0,/H,02 clean followed by SCl/SCZ 
High pressure oxidation (650 “C) and then SiO, wet etch with BOE 
Hot H,SOJH,02 clean followed by SCljSC2, and then RIE 
(0.5 Wcn-*, 10 Pa using CI,/N, (1:15) for 15 s) 
438 
/-I H Richter et a/: Damage to Si substrates 
order to evaluate damage effects a 15 nm thick low temperature 
oxide (LTO) was deposited at 600°C on the RIE exposed Si 
surfaces. At some wafers this layer thickness was increased by 
low pressure CVD (deposition temperature: x 420°C) to approxi- 
mately 85 mn. These oxides were used as gate oxides for metal- 
oxide-semiconductor (MOS) capacitors. The LTO process was 
intended to preserve the damaged Si surface after RIE. The MOS 
capacitors were fabricated by depositing 1 pm thick Al on front 
and backside of the wafers. The area of the capacitors used for the 
C-V measurements was 5.2. lO-3 cm2. C-V data and dielectric 
breakdown measurements characterize the post-RIE cleaned sur- 
faces in comparison to the reference wafers. 
Chemical and structural evaluation 
After CHF,/C,F, RIE. The etch gas CHF, in combination with 
C2F, can remove Si02 at high rates provided the F:C ratio is 
greater than two. A high value of the oxide-to-silicon etch rate 
ratio is the key for any useful fluorocarbon oxide RIE process. 
The mechanism for etching SiO, is dictated by the ability of CF, 
radicals to reduce the oxide and form volatile products. On the 
other hand, Si is mainly etched by fluorine atoms. Therefore, a 
high oxide-to-silicon etch rate ratio is realizable by a high CF,- 
to-F ratio. Increasing amounts of hydrogen-containing CHF, 
scavenge the fluorine atoms resulting in the desired high selec- 
tivity. After RIE, the surfaces are characterized by polymeric 
deposits. For that reason, cleaning procedures are absolutely 
necessary.” 
The state of the silicon surface after etching was examined by 
AES. Figure l(a) illustrates Auger spectra from a surface of a 
25% overetched RIE-exposed (CHF,/C,F,) wafer in comparison 
to a wet etched reference sample. As expected, the dry etched 
surface is contaminated by F- and O-containing residues, identi- 
fied by strong F-KLL and C-KLL peaks and a smaller 0-KLL 
peak (curve (b)). The residue layer thickness, estimated from the 
escape depth of the Auger electrons of different energies, amounts 
to l-2 nm. For the given geometry of the analysis 95% of the 
signal intensity results from a depth x of 21, where I is the mean 
free electron pathway. Therefore, we obtain x values of about 
1.5 nm for the C-KLL, O-KLL, F-KLL Auger transitions. The 
(al 40,000 
0-KLL 
(a) 
:: n- :: 
,‘,: ; 
,,” i_,.,,‘. ,A” ,&.” 
i’ 
C-KLL j 
I I ’ I 1 
. I I 
0 200 400 600 800 
KINETIC ENERGY ( eV ) AES depth profile of a wafer after dry etching (Figure l(b)) 
indicates the existence of the C/F-surface layer. 
In contrast, the AES scan obtained for the wet etched reference 
sample (curve (a) in Figure l(a)) only yields a C-KLL peak and 
an 0-KLL peak (a consequence of air contact after finishing the 
RIE process and before loading into the AES equipment) and 
not a trace of fluorine. 
A comparison of the corresponding atomic force micrographs 
(see Figure 2(a) and (b)) does not illustrate essential differences 
between RIE exposed and wet etched surfaces. Relating to a 
commercial untreated primary substrate (WACKER) the etch 
steps (both dry and wet) do not raise the microroughness sig- 
nificantly. 
After plasma ashing. After 0,/N* ashing the surfaces of the etched 
samples were examined by AES and AFM once more. It is seen 
from the perspective of Auger analysis (Figure 3) that the extent 
of the the carbonaceous layers (cf. Figure 1: dry etched surface) 
is substantially reduced by the 02/N2 ashing, visible by the 
reduction of the C-KLL peak and F-KLL peak (cf. curve (a) 
with curve (b)). Nevertheless, especially marked F-containing 
residues are recognizable. The increase of the 0-KLL peaks 
indicates a stronger oxide covering of the surfaces in consequence 
of the ashing process. For comparison, a spectrum of a wet etched 
reference surface after ashing is also given in Figure 3 (curve (c)). 
AFM investigations (not represented) after 0*/N, ashing show 
a smoothing of the so treated surfaces, not only for the dry etched 
wafer but also for the wet etched sample. 
After post-RIE cleaning treatments. First, the AES scans after the 
four different post-RIE cleaning procedures (cf. Table 1) were 
analysed. A comparison of the AES spectra illustrates the follow- 
ing differences. 
The cleaning procedure without Si removal is only able to 
remove the F-containing residues almost completely. Never- 
theless, a weak F-peak is perceptible in the AES spectrum 
after the “RCA’ cleanup. 
Such F-peak is even more contrasted in the case of the second 
(b) 
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 
SPUTTERTIME ( s ) -o- Si-LW 
/ -o- 0-KLL 
-A- Si-KLL 
% 00 Ad -v-- F-KLL 
P /’ / 0, 
VW ?dA - C-KLL 
0 
Figure 1. (a) AES comparison of surfaces after SiO, wet etching (curve (a), reference wafer) and after SiO, dry etching with CHF&F, (curve (b)). 
(b) AES depth profile of a wafer after Si02 dry etching with CHF3/C2F6 indicating the existence of a C/F-surface layer. 
439 
H H Richter et al: Damage to Si substrates 
(a 
Section Analysis 
x _na Section Analysis 
d 
Figure 2. Atomic force mtcrographs of a Si substrate (a) after SiOz dry etching with CHF&F, and (b) after SiO, wet etching with H,O: NH,F: HF. 
3. 
4. post-RIE cleaning with the additional HF dip and following 
wet etching (Figure 4, curve (a)). 
The cleaning procedure with oxidation and wet etching yields 
the best results. No F-containing residues are detectable by 
AES. 
Also the post-treatment with C&/N2 RIE process seems to 
be an interesting method compared to the others. The AES spectrum of this surface indicates no F- and Cl-residues (Fig- 
ure 4, curve (b)). 
On grounds of air contact between technological step and AES 
measurements detailed information about the C-containing resi- 
dues at the treated surfaces are impossible. However, a com- 
parison of the corresponding C-peaks appears to be of interest. 
20,000 
5 co 15,000 
z 
G ??I 10,000 
5 
5,000 
+ I - 1 . I I ’ I 
0 200 400 600 800 
KINETIC ENERGY ( eV ) 
Figure 3. AES spectra of surfaces before (curve (a)) and after (curve 
(b)) 0,/N? plasma ashing of a previously SiOz dry etched surface. For 
comparison a spectrum of a SiO, wet etched control wafer after an 
analogous ashing procedure (curve (c)) is given 14,000- 
- 12.000- 
5 
m 
- 10,000- 
z 
zi 
5 8,000 - 
2 - 
6,000 - 
4,000 ! ( . I . I I 
0 200 400 600 8 
KINETIC ENERGY ( eV ) 
Figure 4. AES spectra of SiO, dry etched surfaces after different post- 
RIE cleaning procedures. 
440 
H H Richter et al: Damage to Si substrates 
Compared to the corresponding wet etched reference wafers 
the AES scans of these samples present almost identical C-peaks. 
These facts arrive at the conclusion that above all the C-con- 
taining residues after the post-RIE cleaning procedure are caused 
by air contact and not primarily by the SiOz dry etch process in 
the fluorocarbon based plasma. Probably, the ashing process 
following immediately after dry etching removes these residues 
for the most part. 
In all cases, the atomic force micrographs of the four samples 
after cleaning treatment illustrate surfaces with small micro- 
roughness (co.2 nm). Table 2 shows the results relative to an 
untreated primary substrate. In summary, the AFM results repre- 
sented prove that all cleaning procedures raise the microrough- 
ness, but this increase is acceptable for technological applications. 
Figure 5 illustrates a representative example of a surface after 
CIJN, cleaning treatment. 
Electrical evaluation 
Although the electrical characterization by means of MOS 
capacitors has several severe disadvantages, the RIE modified 
layer is either subjected to a high temperature annealing during 
growth of the thin oxide layer, or it is partly consumed during 
the growth of thicker oxide layers, notable changes in the MOS 
characteristics are detectable. In particular, for a relative com- 
parison of different post-RIE procedures, MOS capacitors are 
suitable electrical test vehicles. The results of essential electrical 
parameters extracted from C-V characteristics are shown in 
Table 3. The measured values of fixed charge densities Qn inter- 
face state densities Di,, bulk generation lifetimes zg, and surface 
generation velocities S, were compared with each other. 
As expected, the bulk generation lifetime was found to be 
degraded by RIE, implying introduction of generation-recom- 
bination centres in the near-surface region of the Si substrate. 
However, from the viewpoint of technological applications all 
lifetime values greater than 10e5 are acceptable. That means, only 
the cleaning procedure without Si removal entails unacceptably 
small rl! values. 
A comparison of surface generation velocities as a typical 
interface parameter offers no differences between all post-RIE 
treatments and the wet etched reference samples. S,, values less 
than 1 .O ems- ’ are of technological acceptance. 
In general, there is a clear correlation between the surface 
generation velocity and the interface state density D,,. Differences 
between the reference wafers and RIE exposed/post-cleaned sam- 
ples are only evident for two cleaning procedures: the treatment lc’w 
d Section Analysis 
Figure 5. Atomic force micrograph of Si substrate after SiOz dry etching, 
plasma ashing, and Q/N, cleaning procedure. 
without Si removal and the combined oxidation/SiO, wet etch 
procedure. 
These D,, raises are found to be more than one order of mag- 
nitude and show a large spread of values. The SiOJSi interface 
of these samples is obviously damaged - also after the cleaning 
treatments - as indicated by the large values of D,,. This damage 
takes the form of interfacial charge traps that makes this SiO,/Si 
system less ideal in device applications.” 
Fixed charge densities Qr greater than 2.10” cm-’ are un- 
acceptable. The obtained results for two cleaning procedures 
(oxidation/SiO, wet etch and C&/N2 RIE) are below this limit 
value. However, compared to the wet etched specimens the Qf 
values have doubled to approximately 1 * 10” cm-*. On the other 
Table 2. Relative maximum microroughness from AFM on Si surface subjected to different processes 
Procedure 
-____ 
Untreated substrate 
RIE + ashing + RCA 
RIE + ashing + RCA + 
HF + Si wet etch 
RIE + ashing + RCA + 
oxidation + SiO, wet etch 
RIE + ashing + CITN2 RIE 
compared to: 
RIE 
RIE + ashing Relative maximum Root mean square 
microroughness RMS (nm) 
= :l 0.05 
1.59 0.09 
1.78 0.10 
4.44 0.24 
2.94 0.16 
1.78 0.10 
1.44 0.07 Mean roughness 
R, (nm) 
0.04 
0.07 
0.08 
0.19 
0.13 
0.07 
0.06 
441 
H H Richter et a/: Damage to Si substrates 
Table 3. C-V characteristics of MOS capacitors 
Fixed charge density Qr (JO” cm-‘) 2.5-3.5 2.62.5 z 1.0 z 1.0 zo.5 
Interface state densityI),, (IO” cm-‘) 5-30 x2 z.2 630 z 2 
Bulk generation lifetime rg (s) lo-“2. 1o-6 10-4-10~ 2 5. 1om5-5’ 1om4 10~5-10~3 10~4-2.10-3 
Surface generation velocity S, (ems- ‘) x0.5 20.5 ZO.5 ZO.5 ZO.5 
Table 4. Breakdown voltage measurements of MOS capacitors 
p.imgprT 
RCA cleanup RCA cleanup 
+ HF dip + oxidation RCA cleanup Wet etched 
Electrical parameter RCA cleanup + Si wet etch + SiOz wet etch + C&/N, RIE reference wafer 
_ 
Breakdown field EBD (MV cm-‘) 11.8812.1 12.Gl2.5 13.5-13.8 13.0-13.5 13.3-13.6 
hand, the other two cleaning variants yield fixed charge densities 
above the limit. That means the contaminated samples (cf. the 
AES results after post-RIE cleaning treatments) produce the 
highest Qr values. 
Table 4 shows the result of the breakdown field determination 
for the RIE exposed/post-cleaned samples in comparison to the 
measurements at the wet etched reference wafers. The breakdown 
field represented in Table 4, is defined as the field strength where 
63% of all MOS capacitors failed. As seen, there is only an 
approximative conformity between the breakdown field values 
of capacitors prepared on the reference wafers with those of two 
post-RIE cleaning variants: oxidation/SiO, wet etch and C&/N, 
RIE, respectively. 
In summary, the present results indicate that only completely 
removed dry etch residues yield acceptable electrical parameters. 
In all other cases these contaminations cause an essential degra- 
dation of the electrical properties. 
Conclusions 
The effects of various post-RIE cleaning procedures on Si sur- 
faces damaged by SiO, dry etching was examined. To recover a 
device-quality surface after CHF,/C,F, dry etching, post-RIE 
processing is necessary. 0,/N, ashing is found to be effective 
but not sufficient for residual removal and demand additional 
cleaning efforts. 
In general, a cleaning procedure without Si removal seems to 
be unable to remove the residue layer in the required manner. 
Therefore, this treatment can only be chosen in a process tech- 
nology in which the damaged near-surface region will be con- 
sumed in the following process steps. The conductor pattern 
system AlCu/TiW/PtSi is a practicable example for this thesis. 
During the silicide forming reaction of Pt the consumption of the 
disturbed surface region takes place.13 
The other three procedures with Si removal yielded different 
results. The disadvantage of the variant HF dip/Si wet etch con- 
sists of an incomplete removal of polymer residuals by HF dip. 
Therefore, the following wet chemical attack is inhibited. This 
442 results in lower bulk generation lifetime values and breakdown 
voltages. Moreover, the microroughness is slightly enhanced. 
The procedure characterized by oxidation and SiO, wet etch is 
an interesting cleaning process with Si removal. Prospective C- 
containing residues will be removed by the isotropic wet etch 
step. Moreover, this step seems to eliminate an enhanced micro- 
roughness as a result of the previous oxidation. Also the dry 
cleaning variant with C&/N, RIE yields clean surfaces reflected 
in acceptable electrical parameters. 
In summary, on the grounds of electrical evaluation results, the 
last two procedures are preferred for incorporation into process 
technology. One concludes that the electrical measurement data 
are consistent with the picture of chemical/structural evaluation. 
The results demonstrate the need for a Si surface cleanup treat- 
ment following Si02 RIE prior to further device processing. How- 
ever, there is no universal post-RIE cleaning treatment for 
damage elimination, but only optimized solutions with regard to 
the special technological demands and objectives are realizable. 
Work is in progress to investigate correlations between post- 
RIE surface cleaning and electrical effects using Schottky diodes. 
The Schottky structure is very sensitive to the electrically active 
defects and contaminants due to the barrier modification and the 
exponential dependence of current on the effective barrier height. 
Acknowledgements 
It is a great pleasure to acknowledge the excellent technical assist- 
ance of C Albrecht, S Jatzlau, S Orlowski and D Schinkel. 
References 
’ G S Oehrlein and Y H Lee, J Vat Sci Technol, AS, 1585 (1987). 
‘G S Oehrlein, Mat Sci Eng, B4,441 (1989). 
3 S J Fonash, J Electrochem Sot, 137,3885 (1990). 
4 S J Fonash, Solid State Technol, t&20 1 (1985). 
5X C Mu, S J Fonash, G S Oehrlein, S N Chakravarti, C Parks and J 
Keller, J Appl Phys, 59, 2958 (1986). 
‘T P Chow and C Hopple, J Electrochem Sot, 138, 1399 (1991). 
H H Richter et al: Damage to Si substrates 
’ G S Oehrlein, A A Bright and S W Robey, J Vuc Sci Technol, A6, 1989 
(1988). 
‘P K Gadgil, T D Mantei and X C Mu, J Vuc Sci Technol, B12, 102 
(1994). 
’ A Henry, 0 0 Awadelkarim, J L Lindstrom and G S Oehrlein, J Appl, 
Ph,vs, 66, 5388 (1989). ” G S Oehrlein, Y Zhang, D Vender and 0 Joubert, J Vuc Sci Technol, 
A12, 333 (1994). 
12T Gu, 0 0 Awadelkarims, S J Fonash, J F Rembetski and Y D Chan, 
J Electrochem Sot, 142,606 (1995). 
I3 D Temmler, 9th Japan-Germany Forum on Information Technology, 
lo M Ostling, C S Petersson, H Nordstrom, R Buchta and H-O Blom, J Oita, Japan (1994). 
Vat Sci Technol, BS, 586 (1987). 
443 
