Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B I 18 ( 1996) 630-632 
cm __ __ Iii! EISEVIER Beam Interactions 
with Materials&Atoms 
Heavy ion RBS characterization of multilayer coatings deposited 
through the sol-gel technique 
X. Aslanoglou a7 * , P.A. Assimakopoulos a, C. Trapalis b, G. Kordas b, M.A. Karakassides 
M. Pilakouta ’ 
a Department of Physics, The University of loannina. GR-45110 loannina, Greece 
b Institute of Materials Science, NCSR ” Demokritos” , Aghia Paraskevi - Atriki, Greece 
’ Institute of Nuclear Physics. NCSR “ Demokritos”, Aghia Paraskevi - Attiki, Greece b 
, 
Abstract 
Multilayer reflecting thin films of the systems ZrO,-SiO, and TiO,-SiO, were deposited on glass surfaces using the 
sol-gel technique. A ‘*C beam was utilized in RBS analysis to investigate the inner structure of these multilayer stacks. The 
layers showed uniform thickness and no evidence for significant diffusion between the layers was found. Optical 
Spectroscopy showed wavelength selectivity in the reflection of an 8-layer TiO,-SiO, sample. 
1. Introduction 
Rutherford Backscattering Spectrometry using heavy 
ion (HIRBS) beams provides some interesting differences 
in comparison to the conventional 4He spectroscopy. As 
has been pointed out by many authors in a number of 
comparative studies [l-4], although the energy resolution 
of surface barrier detectors deteriorates as the mass of the 
particles and the energy of the beam increases 151, the 
overall mass resolution of the target improves with the 
increase of the mass and the energy of the beam. This 
behaviour follows the difference in the behaviour of the 
kinematic factor in different reactions. A calculation of the 
dependence of the mass resolution on the target mass 
number for the case of a 4He beam and a ‘*C beam is 
shown in Fig. 1. The calculation was done for incident 
energy 2 MeV and detector resolution (FWHM) 20 keV 
for 4He, while for the “C case the incident energy was 10 
MeV and the detector resolution was 80 keV. As it emerges 
from this comparison, the use of heavy ion beams for 
HIRBS provides superior mass resolution than the conven- 
tional low energy 4He scattering. The depth resolution 
remains at a comparable level in most cases because the 
greater energy deposited by the heavy ion competes with 
the lower detector resolution. However, the lowest de- 
tectable mass number is higher in HIRBS, because ele- 
ments with mass number smaller, or around the mass 
number of the beam are invisible in backscattering. 
* Corresponding author. e-mail xaslanog@cc.uoi.gr. In this work we have used a ‘*C beam at energy 
E = 10 MeV to investigate the structure of multilayer 
systems made of successive thin films of TiO,-SiO, or 
ZrO,-SiO, deposited on glass. 
Thin films of metal oxides (dielectrics) on glass, either 
in a single layer or in multilayer coatings of alternate 
elements are known to modify the optical properties of 
glass. A series of dielectric films with alternate high and 
low refractive indices can, under certain conditions, lead to 
selectivity in the reflection of only certain wavelengths 
[6,7]. In our case, the sequence of the low index of 
refraction of SiO, and the high index of refraction of ZrO, 
or TiO, are tested for the production of a selective mirror. 
The optical properties of the systems were studied by 
reflectance ultraviolet, visible and near infrared (UV-VIS- 
NIR) spectroscopy. 
0i,-: 
0 50 loo 150 ZOC 
Targu Mass Number 
Fig. 1. Mass resolution versus target mass number for a 2 MeV 
4He beam with detector resolution 20 keV and a 10 MeV “C 
beam with detector resolution 80 keV. 
0168-583X/96/$15.00 Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
SSDf 0168-583X(95)01 080-7 
X. Aslano~lou et al. / Nucl. Instr. and Merh. in Phys. Res. B I I8 (1996) 630-632 631 
2. Experimental procedure 
The sol-gel technique was used for the fabrication of 
the oxide films at the Institute of Materials Science, Na- 
tional Center for Scientific Research (NCSR) “Demokri- 
tos”, Athens, Greece. This technique is widely used and 
almost exclusively applied for the fabrication of transpar- 
ent coatings on glass surface. The starting solutions for the 
preparation of the sol were Si(C,H,O),, Ti(C,H,O), and 
Zr(C,H,O), in ethanol, with HNO, as a catalyst. More 
information about this technique can be found in Ref. [g]. 
After the sol preparation, thin layers of metal oxides 
(ZIG,, TiO, or SiO,) were deposited on flat glass plates 
of dimensions (60 mm X 20 mm X 1.5 mm) using the 
dipping process. After the deposition of each new layer. 
the sample was dried at room temperature and then was 
heated in a furnace at 500°C for 20 min. This way, stacks 
of up to eight layers TiO,-SiO, were prepared and up to 
five layers ZrO,--SiO,. 
The RBS measurements were performed by utilizing a 
“C beam of energy IO MeV from the 5.5 MV T11/25 
tandem Van De Graaff accelerator of the Institute of 
Nuclear Physics, NCSR “Demokritos”. The detection sys- 
tem consisted of a single Si surface barrier detector, placed 
at a scattering angle of 0 = 150” with respect to the beam. 
For the analysis and the simulation of the spectra, a new 
code was developed, which is capable of handling any 
heavy ion beam. This code uses the Universal Energy Loss 
Coefficients by Ziegler [9] and the subroutine ZSTOP to 
calculate the normalized yield. The detector resolution was 
measured and was considered in the calculation. The over- 
all accuracy of the determination of the thickness is esti- 
mated at 10%. 
3. Results and discussion 
Samples manufactured through the technique just de- 
scribed, were characterized by RBS in search for defects in 
Fig. 2. RBS spectrum of a three layer ZrO, -50, -ZrO, sample 
on a glass substrate. The solid line represents the simulated I . A_._ 
0 2 4 6 * IO 
Energy (McVl 
Fig. 3. RBS spectrum of a five layer (ZrO,-Si02f sample on 
glass substrate together with the corresponding simulation. 
the internal structure. The spectra of two samples, a three 
layer ZQ-SiOz-ZrO, and a five layer ZrO,-SiO,- 
ZrO,-SiO,-ZrG, are shown in Figs. 2 and 3, together 
with the corresponding simulated spectra. The composition 
of the glass substrate was taken as 5 1% 0, 43% Si and 6% 
Ca. As seen in the spectra, this composition simulates well 
the substrate in all cases. The plateau of I60 can not be 
seen in the spectrum, because oxygen has a mass compara- 
ble to the carbon beam and therefore is “invisible”/in 
HIRBS. The RBS spectra indicate that the ZrO, film is 
contaminated by an element of mass around 180 (with 
AM = 7, from Fig. 1). A subsequent X-Ray Fluorescence 
(XRF) analysis showed that the ZIG, employed for the 
manufacture of the samples was contaminated by HfO, at 
the level of 2%. In either case, the inner layers do not 
show any significant diffusion effects due to the successive 
thermal treatment of the manufacturing process. The sur- 
face density of the ZrO, and SiO, films were found equal 
to 27 f 1 pg/cm’ and 19 5 1 @g/cm’, respectively. 
The spectrum of an eight layer 4(TiO,-SiO,) is shown 
in Fig, 4. In this sample, the layer neighbouring the glass 
substrate is SiO,, which has a composition similar to the 
I 
0 2 4 6 
Energy MZV) 
Fig. 4. RBS spectrum of an eight layer 4(TiO, -SiO,) sample on 
glass substrate. The layer neighbouring to the glass is SiO, and 
cannot be distinguished. 
IX. NEW MATERIALS 
632 X. Aslarwglou et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 118 (1996) 630-632 
Wavelength (nm) 
Fig. 5. Reflectance versus wavelength analysis for the eight layer 
4(TiO, -SiO,) sample shown in Fig. 4. (a) substrate, (b) two layer 
stack, (c) four layer stack, (d) eight layer stack. 
substrate and therefore cannot be distinguished in the 
spectrum. Natural titanium has six stable isotopes: &Ti 
(8%), 47Ti (7.5%), 48Ti (73.7%). 49Ti (5.5%) and “Ti 
(5.3%). The mass resolution with the reaction employed 
here, around target mass number 50, is AM = 2 (Fig. 1). 
As a result, the minor isotopes can be distinguished from 
48Ti, and they dem&strate themselves as tails around the 
major peak. To obtain a good simulation of the Ti peak, all 
six isotopes were included in the calculation as compo- 
nents of the layer. The result shows a good reproduction of 
the overlap between the Ti peaks in the simulation spec- 
trum. A high degree of uniformity of the thickness of the 
layers was found for this sample, with the SiO, layers 
having a surface density psi - 28 f 1 kg/cm’ and the 
TiO, layers pn = 13 + 1 pg/cm2. Intermediate samples 
with fewer coatings showed the same behaviour. 
4. Reflectance analysis 
Reflectance spectra were obtained for both the Ti based 
and Zr based samples. Fig. 4 shows the reflectance spectra 
of the glass substrate covered with a number of (TiO,- 
SiO,) films. The reflectance of the glass substrate (R = 
8.2%) increases according to the number of layers de- 
posited and becomes maximum when 8 layers are de- 
posited. The reflectance of this sample is R - 85% in the wavelength region of 600-650 nm, thus becoming a selec- 
tive mirror. 
In the case of the Zr based group, the transition from a 
single ZrO, layer to three and five ZrO, and SiO, stacks 
did not show any significant selectivity of the reflectance 
on a particular wavelength band. 
5. Conclusions 
In this work Heavy Ion RBS was used to study the 
structure of multilayer coatings deposited on a glass sub- 
strate through the sol-gel process. The 10 MeV 12C beam 
employed was found to have adequate mass and depth 
resolution for analysis of these thin films. Although the 
inner layers of the samples examined suffered multiple 
thermal treatments during fabrication, no evidence of sig- 
nificant diffusion between the layers was detected. The 
optical analysis showed that an eight layer 4(TiO,-SiO,) 
stack had an 85% reflectance in the wavelength region of 
600-650 nm. 
References 
Ill 
El 
[31 
[41 
[51 
@I 
[71 
(81 
[91 W.K. Chu, J.W. Mayer and M.A. Nicolet, in: Backscattering 
Spectrometry (Academic Press, New York, 1978). 
K.M. Yu, J.M. Jaklevic and E.E. Haller, Nucl. Instr. and Meth 
B 10/l 1 (1985) 606. 
M. Dcbeli, U.S. Fischer, M. Suter and W. WBlti, Nucl. Instr. 
and Meth. B 63 (1992) 68. 
E. Norbeck, L.W. Li, H.H. Lin and M.E. Anderson, Nucl. 
Instr. and Meth. B 9 (1985) 197. 
M. ostling, C.S. Petersson, P. Johansson, A. Wikstrijm and G. 
Possnert, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 15 (1986) 729. 
P. Biswas, D. Kundu and D. Ganguli, J. Mater. Sci. Len. 6 
(1987) 1481. 
D. Kundu, P. Biswas and D. Ganguli, J. Non-Cryst. Solids 
110 (1989) 13. 
H. Dislich and E. Hussmarm, Thin Solid Films 77 (1981) 129. 
J.F. Ziegler, J.P. Biersack and U. Littmark, The Stopping and 
Range of the Ions in Matter, Vol. 5 (Pergamon, New York, 
1980). 
