Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B 111 (1996) 187- 189 
cm . __ __ l!!B ELSEVIER NOM B Beam Interactions 
with Materials &Atoms 
New plasma source ion-implantation technique for inner surface 
modification of materials 
MuSun *, S.Z. Yang, B. Li 
Group 101, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China 
Received 14 September 1995 
Abstract 
Plasma source ion-implantation (PSII) is a non-line-of-sight ion implantation technique for surface modification of 
materials, but the present technique is only suitable for outer surface modification of targets, not for inner surface 
modification of targets. In this paper we present a new technique which applies to inner surface implantation. Preliminary 
experiment results show that this new technique: (1) increases plasma density and uniformity obviously inside the target 
inner surface; (2) generates a plasma sheath between the inner surface of the target and plasma so as to implant the inner 
surface of the target effectively; (3) achieves a dose uniformity acceptable for industrial application. 
!Plasma source ion-implantation (PSII) is a new ion 
implantation technique [l-5] for surface modification of 
materials. Compared with conventional ion implantation, 
PSI1 has the following advantages [6]: (1) there is no need 
for target manipulation and target masking because of its 
non-line-of-sight nature; (2) it has greater production 
*ughput, especially for large targets; (3) it is readily 
SC led to large and/or heavy targets; (4) the facility is 
si $ ple, cost effective and less expensive. The PSI1 tech- 
ni ue has thus been optimized for surface modification of 
4, a ~ ide range of materials for industrial application [7-lo]. 
In ~ spite of these advantages, however, the present PSI1 
te 
C hnique is only suitable to implantation of outer surface 
or ,exposed areas of the target. It is quite limited or even 
im P ossible for inner surface implantation of the target. 
In this paper we present a new PSI1 technique applied 
to the inner surface implantation of the target, followed by 
so 
m e preliminary experiment results and a description of 
its sheath model. 
~ This new PSI1 device is shown schematically in Fig. 1. 
The main construction is similar to the existing PSI1 
device. Plasma is generated in a cylindrical vacuum cham- 
ber by a conventional filament discharge, the device is 
operated with nitrogen at a pressure of 2 X 10m3 Torr, and 
a lasma density of lo’-10” cme3, the negative high 
I: vo tage applied to the target is in the range of IO-50 kV 
with a very small pulse width of 5-10 /.LS and a typical 
* Corresponding author. frequency of 100 Hz. The main characteristics which differ 
from the present PSI1 are that the targets we selected are a 
series of aluminum cylindrical tubes of different sizes, and 
a metal anode connected with vacuum chamber wall is 
fixed in the center of the cylindrical target. 
In PSII, plasma is generated in a vacuum chamber 
through working gas ionization caused by primary elec- 
trons. It is hard for primary electrons to get into the . cylindrical target under filament dtscharge bias applied 
between filament and vacuum chamber wall, so plasma 
density inside the target must be much less than that 
outside the target, and is not uniform. With the decrease of 
ratio D/L, where D is the diameter of the target and L is 
the length of the target, this difference becomes greater. 
Beside, when a negative high voltage is applied to the 
target there is almost no electric field inside the target with 
the exception of the regions near target sides (see Fig. 2a). 
Therefore, it is impossible to form a plasma sheath propa- 
gating along the normal line of the inner surface of the 
target when the target is immersed in plasma. In our new 
PSI1 device, a metal anode connected with the chamber 
wall is set up inside the cylindrical target. This helps to 
draw primary electrons into the target to ionize the work- 
ing gas so that the plasma density and uniformity inside 
the target are considerably increased. On the other hand, a 
uniform electric field can be formed between the inner 
surface and the metal anode when a negative high voltage 
is applied to the target (see Fig. 2b), which results in a 
plasma sheath propagating towards the metal anode when 
the target is immersed in plasma so as to make inner 
surface implantation possible. 
0168-583X/%/$15.00 0 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
SSDZ 0168-583X(95)01293-1 
188 M. Sun et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Rex B 111 (1996) 187-189 
P HV pulse 
metal 
anode \ 
vacuum 
chamber’ 
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of PSI1 device for inner surface 
implantation. 
In order to quantify plasma density and uniformity 
inside the target with different size factor of D/L and 
compare the influence of the metal anode on them, a series 
of targets were immersed in plasma with a density of 
1 X 10” cmm3 and electron temperature of 2 eV, and axial 
distributions of plasma density inside the targets were 
measured using a Langmuir probe. The results show that 
the axial distribution of plasma density inside the target is 
not uniform; plasma density in the region near the two 
sides is close to that outside the target. With increasing 
distance from the sides, the plasma density becomes less 
and less, and is least in the middle of the target. If we use 
the ratio TZJTZ,~ (ni, is the plasma density in the middle 
of the target, nout is the plasma density outside the target) 
as a measure of plasma density uniformity inside the 
target, it is shown in Fig. 3 that with the decrease of D/L, 
the ratio nin/nOUt decreases and uniformity decreases. 
After a metal anode is applied, the ratio nin/noUt clearly 
increases. For example, when D/L = 0.6 it is close to 1.0, 
when D/L = 0.4 it increases by three times, and by four 
times when D/L = 0.2. This means that when a metal 
anode is set up inside the target, the plasma density and 
uniformity inside the target can be improved well enough 
for inner surface implantation. At the same time, the 
implantation dose uniformity inside the target will be also 
within an acceptable range for the industrial application of 
ion implantation. 
‘b 
Fig. 2. Electric field distribution inside the cylindrical target. (a) 
There is almost no electric field, (b) a uniform electric field is 
formed when a metal anode is set up inside the target. 0.3 - 
0.2 - . with anode 
0 without anode 
0.0 I I I I I 1 
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 
D/L 
Fig. 3. Influence of metal anode and target size factor D/L on 
plasma uniformity inside the target. 
As for the sheath model, it can be described as. follow- 
ing three time scales. At time t = 0 the target is at zero 
potential. As a large negative high voltage pulse is applied 
to the target on a time scale of the inverse electron plasma 
frequency w;‘, electrons near the target inner surface are 
expelled from this region and ion motion is negligible so 
that an ion matrix sheath is formed (see Fig. 4). Next, on a 
slower time scale of the inverse ion plasma frequency 
wpi’, ions are accelerated towards the inner surface of the 
target as they fall through the ion matrix sheath. Finally, 
on a still longer time scale the decreasing ion density 
inside the sheath region causes a corresponding decrease in 
the electron density and the sheath edge expands at about 
the ion acoustic velocity. If the expanding sheath is as- 
sumed to obey the Child-Langmuir law [l l] at each 
instant of the propagation and the current is supplied by 
the ions uncovered by the expanding sheath, the sheath 
edge velocity in this case can be described as 
z _ 4.70 2 us/= 
/-- _-- -- 
dt 9n em rr,P” 
where I is the radius of the sheath edge, rt is the inner 
radius of cylindrical target, n is the plasma density, v is 
the target negative bias, m is the ion mass, and /3 = fi T/I~). 
The negative sign means that the sheath expands toward 
the center. 
In summary, we present a new technique for inner 
surface implantation of cylindrical target and describe a 
Fig. 4. Ion matrix sheath model for inner surface implantation. 
M. Sun et al./Nucl. Ins@. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B II1 (1996) 187-189 189 
sheath model in this case. Experiment results show that 
this method can: ( 1) obviouslv increase Dlasma densitv and and Plasma-Assisted Processes for Industrial Applications, 
May 22-25, 1988, Atlanta, GA. . 
uniformity inside the target at the inner surface; (2) gener- 
ate a plasma sheath between inner surface of the target and 
plasma so as to implant the inner surface of the target 
effectively; (3) achieve a dose uniformity acceptable for 
industrial application. [5] G.P. Meeker, S. Baumann, J.R. Conrad and R.S. Post, in: 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Ion Beam 
Modification of Materials, Tokyo,.June 12-17, 1988. 
[6] J.R. Conrad and C. Forest, in: IEEE International Conference 
of Plasma Science, Saskatoon, Canada. Mav 19-21. 1986. D. 
28. 
[7] J.R. Conrad and T. Castagna, in: Proceedings of the 39th 
Annual Gaseous Electronics Conference, Madison, WI, Octo- 
References ber 7-10, 1986, p. 75. 
[8] J.R. Conrad and T. Castagna, Bull. Am. Phys. Sot. 31 (1986) 
1479. 
[l] J.R. Conrad, J. Appl. Phys. 62 (1987) 777. 
[2] J.R. Conrad, R.A. Dodd, F.J. Worzala and N.C. Tran, J. 
Appl. Phys. 62 (1987) 4591. 
[3] J.R. Conrad, R.A. Dodd, F.J. Worzala and X. Qiu, Surf. 
Coatings Technol. 36 (1988) 927. 
[4] J.R. Conrad, R.A. Dodd, F.J. Worzala, X. Qiu and R.S. Post, 
in: Proceedings of the ASM Conference on Ion Implantation [9] F.J. Worzala, R.A. Dodd, J.R. Conrad and J.L. Radtke, in: 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Tool Materi- 
als, Chicago, IL, September 28-October 1, 1987. 
[lo] J.R. Conrad and J.I. Radtke, Conference Record, 1987 IEEE 
International Conference on Plasma Science, Arlington, VA, 
June l-3, 1987, paper 6Y7, p. 124. 
[l l] I. Langmuir and K. Blodgett, Phys. Rev. 22 (,1923) 347. 
