Pergamon Vacuum/volume 47/numbers 6-g/pages 919 to 929/1996 
Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved 
PII:SOO42-207X(96100094-2 0042-207X/96$15.00+.00 
Two-dimensional measurements of thin film erosion 
and deposition by calorimetry of interference colors 
and its application in fusion devices 
P Wienhold and F Weschenfelder, lnstitut fiir Plasmaphysik, Forschungszentrum Jiilich GmbH, Ass. 
EURATOM-KFA, D-52425 Jiilich, Germany 
The paper describes time resolved observations of the erosion of a thin (Z 705 nm) and transparent a-B:D film 
on a roof-like graphite test probe (60 mm x 63 mm) in the scrape-off layer plasma of the tokamak TEXTOR-94. 
Steady state of the erosion pattern was a/most achieved after 22 discharges (727.3s total exposure time). 
After each of the pulses the interference color pattern in illuminating light of 3200 K color temperature was 
observed by means of conventional video technique and the color coordinates R, G, B measured. Since they 
can be related unique/y to the film thickness contour maps and profiles could be evaluated and erosion rates 
determined. Net deposition on parts of the surface is also observed. Most of the results can be described by 
erosion due to the hydrogen flux and the simultaneous deposition of carbon and other impurities from the 
background plasma. The deposition of impurities onto the a-B:D bulk seems to reduce the erosion rates which 
profongs its lifetime. This interpretation is backed by AES and NRA analysis of the boron content and by 
EPMA. Copyright 0 7996 Elsevier Science Ltd. 
Key words: TEXTOR-94, calorimetry, thin film erosion, a-BrD, protective coatings, erosion/deposition 
modelling. 
Introduction 
Colorimetry has been developed at the Jiilich tokamak TEX- 
TOR-94 to observe thickness changes of thin coatings on 
extended areas.’ These coatings cover the inner wall surface- 
inconel liner and graphite limiters-in the form of amorphous 
semi-transparent boron and carbon containing hydrogenated 
films (a-C/B:H) of about 1OOnm thickness in order to prevent 
the tokamak plasma from metal and oxygen impurity release.’ 
Despite the erosion of boron and carbon due to plasma hydrogen. 
their ionization and transport away along the magnetic field lines 
in the scrape-off layer (SOL), the films can be reformed partly by 
deposition of species eroded at other parts of the wall’ or by 
prompt redeposition.4 The survival time of the film depends on 
the balance of the rates for erosion and deposition:5 it may vary 
between seconds and hours at different locations, and even areas 
of net deposition develop. The control of this material metab- 
olism and the in situ wall protection will be of essential import- 
ance in future fusion devices.h 
Colorimetry is a technique to measure on extended areas the 
thickness changes of the protective coatings between about 30 
and 500 nm, by means of the accompanying changes in the inter- 
ference colors in illuminating light. At TEXTOR- we instalted 
a CCD color camera and recorded images from test pieces after each plasma discharge. They were processed later in order to 
determine thickness profiles and to create contour plots from the 
measured color coordinates. Three-filter calorimetry by means 
of a black and white camera has been set up successfully at the 
tokamak D-111 D where neutrons coming out of the fusion pro- 
cess would affect a color camera.” At JET calorimetry has been 
applied to observe divertor plates.x In the following we will report 
mainly about findings from an erosion experiment carried out 
recently at TEXTOR-94. The calorimetric data evaluation will 
be addressed briefly. 
Experimental 
Sample preparation. A roof-like graphite test piece with a size of 
60 mm x 63 mm and a tilt angle of 20.8 (see Figure I) was covered 
with an aluminum interlayer of ~300nm and then boronized 
on the top surface twice along with routine boronizations in 
TEXTOR- (rf assisted DC glow discharge in B,D, and He). 
This led to the formation of a pure and rather homogeneous a- 
B:D film on top of the aluminum with thicknesses ranging 
between 95 and 110 nm. The film appeared yellow-greenish in 
dayhght. The test piece was mounted with four graphite screws 
onto a graphite holder which was shielded on ion and electron 
919 
P Wienhold and F Weschenfeldec Measurements of thin film erosion and deposition 
Al plate ~ 
graphite plate - 
ion drift side a-B:D (100 nm) 
Al layer (300 ran) 1 illumination 1 
jobservationl 
drift side with aluminum plates (2 mm thick). This avoids carbon 
sputtering and direct deposition onto the adjacent roof surface. 
Holder and sample were inserted into the machine from the 
bottom by means of a limiter lock system and oriented in a way 
that the top corner of the roof shielded the surface against the 
electron drift side. The angled surface pointed to the ion drift 
side direction. It was illuminated and observed from the top. 
Since the holder was 5 mm wider than the roof a small uncovered 
graphite area could be used later for the grey balance of the 
images. 
Material constants. Two small silicon wafers boronized together 
with the roof sample but at another location were analyzed eilip- 
sometrically after dismounting. Measurements under 5 different 
incident angles (between 30” and 70”) using light of wavelength 
;i = 632 nm yielded the refractive constant n = 2.7 with an uncer- 
tainty of less than 0.1, the extinction constant k = 0.15 kO.01 
and the film thickness 39 nm. Its composition was almost pure a- 
B:D with small amounts of carbon near the surface and at the 
interface as can be seen from the AES-depth profile in Figure 2. 
There was almost no oxygen present in the layer (not shown). 
The profiles show also a slight increase of the impurity content 
at a depth (around 18 nm) which separates the strata formed in 
the two boronization steps. The area1 densities of B determined 
by nuclear reaction analysis (NRA) and by electron probe micro 
analysis (EPMA) agree within 20% and correspond to an average 
atomic density of 1.0 x 10z3cm3. This comparatively high density 
coincides with the high refractive constant’ and might have been 
the reason for the doubled etching time needed during the AES 
sputter process. The values for a-C:D or boron containing a- 
C/B:D are 6.5 x 10z2cmp3 and n~2, respectively.‘” 
Exposures in TEXTOR-94. The roof piece was kept with its edge 
at a radial position of 47.2cm for most of the exposures and 
covered a radial range of 22mm (out to 49.4cm) because of its 
declination. This is well within the scrape-off layer, since the 
920 toroidal belt limiter (ALT II) defined the plasma radius 
ra = 46cm. The poloidal limiters and the reference limiter on ion 
drift side were withdrawn to 49 and 50cm, respectively. The 
plasma discharges (current Ip = 350 kA, toroidal magnetic field 
of BT = 2.25 T, average line density n,(O)~2.5 x 10” cm ‘) were 
carried out in deuterium. Most of them were auxiliary heated by 
neutral hydrogen beam coinjection (NBI) of 1.3 MW power 
which increased the density and temperature at the last closed 
flux surface (LCFS) from n,(r,) = 2.4 x 10’2cmp’ to 6.2 x lOI 
cm-’ and from TJr,) = 25eV to 44eV, respectively. Other 
exposure parameters are listed in Table 1. 
There were also 5 pulses that disrupted after 1.1 s. The total 
exposure time was 12 1.3 s. 
During the exposures the test piece has been observed in the 
emitted B I1 light with CCD cameras from side and top. A 
spectrometer was viewing from the side across the roof surface 
at a position about 1 cm away from the edge. After each plasma 
discharge the 4 halogen lamps (each of SOW) located in the 
liner inside the machine roughly 1 m above were activated. They 
illuminated the surface of the test piece with light of 3200K 
color temperature. The color patterns were then recorded using 
a conventional video technique from the same direction through 
a window by means of a CCD color camera.’ Single images were 
grabbed afterwards with a frame grabber board and stored in a 
personal computer for further processing. 
After the experiment the test piece was dismounted for visual 
inspection. The photograph (Figure 3) shows the final color pat- 
tern of the precoated area in top view. Obviously, a part of the 
initial a-B:D coating is strongly eroded (right hand side). The left 
side which was further away from the plasma exhibits fringes of 
the first interference order which indicate a steep increase in 
thickness up to a plateau region. In contrast to the strong change 
in the toroidal field direction the slight changes in the poloidal 
direction (perpendicular) cause almost straight contour lines of 
the colors. The four screw holes in the corners have little influence 
on the pattern. 
Data evaluation 
Colorimetry of interference colors. Thickness changes within a 
few nanometers can be recognized by calorimetry of the thin 
film interference colors on extended substrate areas (- 50 cm’) in 
TEXTOR-94. The technique is based on a correct measurement 
of the color coordinates all over the surface which are related 
mainly to the film thickness d However refractive and extinction 
constants (n, k) of both film and substrate, spectral distribution 
of illuminating light $l(n) and angle of incidence B are important 
as well and influence the reflected spectral distributions $(2) 
according to the interference laws.” Any of these distributions 
corresponds to a particular color impression which can be 
uniquely described by the three color coordinates R, G, B typi- 
cally. The locally dependent coordinates are measured by the 
calorimetric facility (camera, grabber board, computer), so that 
the thickness-pattern can be inferred.’ 
The formalism has often been published,‘2.‘3 thus only a short 
description will be given here. The CCD camera generates color 
coordinates (in the form of output voltages) according to 
R = c,&(A)P&+Li 
G = c&(l&(~)d/z (1) 
B = c&b(JJP&)dii 
P Wienhold and F Weschenfeldec Measurements of thin film erosion and deposition 
Figure 2. AES sputter depth profile through the virgin a-B:D film deposited on a silicon substrate + silicon 
-B- boron 
--)c carbon 
depth [nm] 
Table 1. Non-dlsrupted pulses with a Bat top time of 4 s 
Radial position 
Pulse Duration NBI during flat top of probe edge 
I 3.x s 46.8 cm 
3 
; 5.x 5 47.8 cm 
6.0 s 47.2 cm 
4-h 7.2 s 2s 47.2 cm 
I 6.1 s 47.2 cm 
8-17 7.25 s 2s 47.2 cm 
where P,, P,, and P, are the relative responses of three different 
sensors having their maxima in the red (615 nm), green (535 nm) 
and blue (475 nm) part of the spectrum. The calibration factors 
cR, cCi and C” have to be adjusted by means of a grey balance 
(defined by R = G = B) with light of the initial spectral dis- 
tribution il(i) which is reflected unchanged from an ideal white 
or grey surface, e.g. the virgin graphite surface itself. 
In the case of interference colors of thin films on substrates 
a two-dimensional representation in terms of the chromaticity 
coordinates 
.Y = R/(R+G+B)andj,= G/(R+G+B) (21 
is fully sufficient. As Figure 4 shows the (UJ) values form a 
triangular shaped trace if an incident monochromatic light 
increases the wavelength within the sensitive range of the camera 
beginning at 385 nm (red, lower left corner) over 520nm (green, 
upper corner) up to 880 nm (red, right corner). Any other visible 
distribution will create (.x,J,) pairs defining a point inside the 
triangle. In particular, the unchanged spectral distribution is 
represented by the ‘no color’ point (l/3,1/3). These are also the 
almost identical coordinates for the spectral distribution reflected 
from a free aluminum surface (film thickness d = 0). But, if d 
grows the varying distributions $(i) form a trace which circles 
the ‘no colour’ point once for each order of interference, thus 
passing the color sections yellow, purple, blue and green regu- 
larly, As can be seen the color tone angle (hue) h,!,.,, between 
the abscissa and a line intersecting the center and a single point (.u,J~) on the curve is uniquely related to the tilm thickness d 
(indicated in the figure as dots in 1Onm steps) within each of 
the orders of interference and can be calculated via the simple 
equation 
tan h = (_v- 1/3)/(.x- l/3). (3) 
Figure 5 shows 11 = lz(d;n,,k,,t),$,) as a Cartesian plot for the system 
a-BID/AI taking into account the measured optical constants and 
light of color temperature 3200 K and an incident angle 0 = 20.8’ _ 
Since we measure h (via R, G. B) under these conditions the 
according film thicknesses can be determined from the curve 
directly. The maximum deviation is 1.8 nm;degree at rl = 70 nm. 
Image processing. For the grey balance the non-coated areas have 
been scanned (part of the graphite holder plus graphite screws in 
the roof sample) from the image grabbed before exposure and 
the R, G. B values measured. Their average ratios G:R = 
1.1 I kO.05 and G/B = 1.04~0.05 were used as calibration 
factors (‘K and cg, respectively, together with c’(+ = I. and all RGB 
data files corrected accordingly. 
The image files represent the total surface area of 
63 mm x 60 mm (top view) in 480 lines with 3 I2 pixels and were 
averaged over rectangular fields of 16 x 8 according to a ‘mosaic’- 
like structure. This yields a reduced data field of 30 lines with 39 
fields each and a space resolution of about 2 mm. but with much 
improved statistical accuracy of 5P10%. It is sufficient, however, 
to create two-dimensional contour plots as e.g. given in Figure 6 
for the image taken after the last exposure. It corresponds fuHy 
to the color pattern visible in the photograph (Figure 3). Areas 
between the screw holes are omitted here for simplicity as well as 
contour lines for thicknesses below 20 nm which are not correctly 
recognized by the system. As expected the film has become very 
thin (20-40 nm), but increases steeply between 32 and 28 mm of 
toroidal distance to 94nm thickness. It turns with slower slope 
into the plateau region (I 27 nm). 
Post mortem analysis. Surprising is the steepness of the erosion 
edge which has been checked by fringe analysis of the sample 
after the end of the experiment. This implies a color -thickness 
921 
P Wienhold and F Weschenfeldec Measurements of thin film erosion and deposition 
0.0 I I 
OTO 012 014 o!s 0!8 I.” n 
X 
Figure 4. Development of chromaticity coordinates .x,1* (see text) for a transparent film (M = 2.7) growing on an Al-substrate and in the light of color 
temperature 3200 K observed with the CCD color camera Pulnix TMC74. The definition of the color tone angle hue. h,,,,,l is indicated. 
1 O~‘“,.‘~,~“,~“,‘~‘,‘~‘,“~,~‘~,“‘,”~ 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 2 IO 
THICKNESS [nm] a-B:D (n=2.7 k=O. 15)/Al 
Figure 5. Relation between hue and film thickness according to Figure 4 as a Cartesian plot (incidence angle .Q = 20.8“) 
relation similar to the one shown in Figure 5, but calculated for 
daylight illumination and a human observer,’ and relates the 
principal color impressions yellow (Y), purple (P), blue (B) and 
green (G) to the according thickness ranges. The result of this 
analysis along the central part of the surface in the toroidal 
direction is given as a chain of boxes in Figure 7 and includes the 
reddish (R) color impression of the plateau region (transition to 
purple of second order of interference). Steepness of the profile 
as well as absolute amounts of thicknesses fit well within about 
10% the contours given in Figure 6. For further comparison a 
profile is given (dots) which was averaged from ten poloidally 
equidistant line scans made in the toroidal direction. This yields a 
statistical error of about 10% for the measured color coordinates 
RGB, but maximum space resolution of 0.2 mm. 
922 First investigations of B, C, Si and Al made by EPMA and of 
B made by NRA show that carbon and silicon are present in the 
deposit and have replaced also a fraction of the boron. Boron is 
found also beyond the erosion edge where the measured thick- 
nesses fall below 20 nm. Here, part of the Al inter-layer is eroded. 
These results are preliminary, however, because the analysis is 
not yet completed. 
Colored deposits had grown on the aluminum shielding plates 
by impurity deposition from the background plasma. This is 
mainly carbon (73%) and sihcon (24%) and very little boron as 
measured by EPMA. Silicon was likely present in TEXTOR 
because SiD, had been puffed through limiter holes two weeks 
before the erosion experiment. The total impurity concentration 
of 6.9 x lO”cm~ found at the end of the plate (r = 49.7 cm) on 
P Wienhold a&F Weschenfeldec Measurements of thin film erosion and deposition 
Figul re 3. To view photograph of the roof sample after the end of the experiment and dismounting. The dark circles are screw hates. 
923 
P Wienhold and F Weschenfeldec Measurements of thin film erosion and deposition 
Figure 6. Thickness contour from TOROIDAL DISTANCE [mm] 
hue values measured across the image which was recorded after the last exposure (#60313). 
_ - fringe analysis 
0 “:“““,““““‘l~~~~~~~~~,.~~~~~~~~,~~~..~~~~ calorimetry 
0 IO 20 30 40 50 
TOROIDAL DISTANCE [mm] 
Figure 7. Thickness profile in the toroidal direction as determined by interference fringe analysis (boxes) of the sample after dismounting and one 
profile (dots) averaged from ten colorimetrical measurements at different poloidal locations. 
the ion drift side corresponds well to the pale yelIow hue which 
indicates the beginning of the 2nd order of interference (l35- 
175 nm for a-C:H with n = 2).’ 
Results 
Transition from deposition to erosion zone. Because the thicknesses 
change very little in the poloidal direction (see Figure 6) we will 
in the foilowing compare the averaged thickness profiles made in 
the toroidal direction instead of the set of contour plots. Figure 
8 shows part of the results. Scans are given from images taken 
after an exposure time of about 30 s (triangles), 59 s (circles) and 
12 1 s (squares) and compared with the thickness profile gained from an image before exposure (thick line). Because of the dec- 
lination of the roof surface the toroidal locations (t in mm) 
correspond to different radial distances from the plasma center 
for which examples (r in cm) are written parallel to the abscissa 
values. Note that the test piece ended at r = 47.2 cm, the confined 
main plasma at r, = 46cm. 
A deposition area can be recognized clearly beyond the dis- 
tance rz 48.5 cm (t< 25 mm) well in the scrape-off layer. The 
thickness increases gradually during the experiment from the 
initial values between 95 and 1OOnm up to 125 and 1 I5 nm, 
respectively, with a growth rate of about + 0.2nm/s. Since the 
graphite holder was shielded by aluminum plates which prevent 
carbon sputtering and its direct redeposition onto the sample the 
925 
P Wienhold and F Weschenfeldec Measurements of thin film erosion and deposition 
~“““i”“““““““““““““““““““““““““~ 
c/1 loo- 
: 
5 2 
E 
W 50- . :. . 
2 
3 ‘7 ;-, i 
\ 
‘L -L* 
5 12s 5; s 30 s 
r: 49.1 48.7 48.3 47.9 47.5 cm 
0 ““““‘I”“““‘I”““‘“l”“““‘I”“““‘I”“””’ 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 
TOROIDAL DISTANCE ACROSS THE TILE [mm] 
Figure 8. Selection of thickness profiles in the toroidal direction as measured by calorimetry. The radial distances from the plasma center change with 
toioidal location across the roof slope. 
growth is due to deposition of impurities (C, Si) out of the 
background plasma. Throughout the series of discharges the 
deposition zone ends at f z 28 mm (corresponding to r z48.4cm) 
where the thickness of roughly 100nm remains constant (rate 
Onm/s). Despite the deposition of the impurities erosion is 
observed at t > 30 mm with rates up to - 6 rim/s,, but varying with 
space and time. 
Time evolution of erosion. The gradual disappearance of the a- 
B:D film in the erosion zone with exposure time can better be 
seen from Figure 9. Beside the former profiles (thick lines) most 
of the others measured in between are given (thin lines) together 
with the integrated exposure time. The initial thickness between 
100 and 110 nm in this area decreases slowly first and with erosion 
rates not higher than zz - 1.5 nmjs at locations r 347.5 cm. But, 
it sharply drops to z -6 nmjs when the layer becomes thinner than about 88 nm (dashed line) resulting in a sudden decrease by 
roughly 40nm within a single discharge. This drop happens at 
increasing radial locations as time proceeds which results in a 
motion of the erosion edge position down the roof. In spite of 
this high rate which would be sufficient to blow off the film within 
less than 20 s it can survive up to about 120 s on the surface, e.g. 
near the transition point. After the drastic decrease in thickness 
to about 43 nm the erosion rate is reduced again and becomes 
comparable to the values at the beginning. 
Discussion of erosion/deposition rates 
Peak erosion rates. At present we are not able to present a con- 
clusive model for the observations because not all of the material 
constants needed for final discussion are known. Nevertheless, 
part of results become plausible with reasonable assumptions for 
I-: 40.3 48.1 47.9 47.7 47.5 cm 
O,~~~,,~,,,,~~~,,,,,,,~~~,,,,‘,,,,l~ 
25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 
TOROIDAL DISTANCE [mm] 
Figure 9. Thickness profiles in the erosion dominated zone. The integrated exposure times are given. 
926 
P We&told and F Weschenfeldec Measurements of thin film erosion and deposition 
the sputter erosion yields and for the hydrogen and impurity 
fluxes. 
In order to determine the high erosion rates the differences 
between two succeeding thickness profiles were calculated at the 
positions of their steepest slopes. They have been integrated 
between the two (relative) minima adjacent to the peaked 
maximum (compare Figure 9). Dividing these values through the 
half widths of the peaks yields average losses between -45 and 
- 37 nm during one exposure. Taking into account the exposure 
time the peak erosion rates were calculated and are given in 
Figure IO as squares. They seem to depend slightly only on radial 
position and range between - 7 and - 4 nmjs. 
This behavior may be compared with the slight decrease (decay 
length i,, = I. I cm) of the deuterium ion flux from 
Tn = 3.8 x 1O’“cm ~‘s-’ to 2.2 x 10’8cm~2s~’ in the radial range 
from 47.5 cm to 48.2cm. These values have been calculated by 
means of the measured electron density and temperature at the 
LCFS14 giving consideration to the neutral beam power injected 
during one third of the exposure time. But, erosion yields 
Y = 0.00S’5 and even 0.01’” as published for boron containing 
amorphous carbon a-C!B:H are not sufficient to explain the high 
rates. Higher sputter rates of 0.03 for 350eV Hi ions on a- 
B:H” are reported and even values up to 0.14’” for pure boron 
bombarded with 400eV D+ ions if the angle of incidence is not 
perpendicular. The line connecting the two stars in Figure 10 has 
been calculated for Y’, = 0.05 and a boron density of 
1 .O x 10” cm ’ as was measured for the original a-B:D deposit 
and shows that these assumptions can explain the data. Sput- 
tering by carbon or oxygen impurities in the SOL plasma do not 
contribute considerably (thin lines), even if a flux ratio of 0.04 to 
r,,.19 and an ion energy of about 5 kT, are assumed. 
Intermediate rates. The rates observed in the erosion zone during 
the intermediate time before peak erosion is achieved are much 
less. As can be gathered from Figure 9 the thickness at a particular 
radial position decreases more or less linearly with time until 
about 88 nm is reached. This time is shorter, however, at positions 
close to the plasma edge, but becomes larger further out. The 
erosion rates vary accordingly. They were calculated from the average slopes of the thickness changes with time and are given 
in Figure 11 as crosses for some radial positions. A few deposition 
rates calculated in the same way are also given. 
The rates range between - 1.6 rim/s at r = 47.4cm, zero at 
Y” = 48.4cm, and +0.2 nmjs at Y = 49.1 cm. The fact that erosion 
turns into deposition at the fixed position suggests a balance 
between the eroding hydrogen flux Tl, and the impurity depo- 
sition flux r, from the background,‘ but with a ratio which 
depends on radial distance. For the SOL of TEXTOR-94, the 
fluxes can be assumed as exponentially decaying’J and the net 
rate ;+ should be given by 
y[nmisj = sinb{r,(r,)exp( - (r-r,,):‘i., 
- l-dr-0) YrGP( - (1. - G%Jj~) (4) 
where I,, and i., are the decay lengths for the deuterium and the 
impurity fluxes in the SOL, Yl, the sputter erosion yield. p the 
atomic density of the deposit, and 6 = 20.8 the tilt angle of the 
sample (‘roof). Note, that the rates would become higher by a 
factor of 2.8 if 6 = 90’ (normal incidence of particles). 
Since :$r,,) = 0 and r,(r,) = I .7 x 10” cm ‘s ’ the value for 
the yield Y, can be inferred by taking into account the impurity 
flux. The estimate from the deposit which has grown after 121.3 s 
at r = 49.7 cm on the aluminum shielding plate can be made only 
very roughly. But, if we assume that the decay length is that 
of carbon (& ~2.Ocrn)~ and that chemical erosion cannot be 
neglected T,(r,) it should fall into the range between 1.1 and 
1.8 x 10’hcm~‘s~‘. Accordingly, the values for Y,, in eqn (4) vary 
between 0.006 and 0.01. They are much less than 0.05 which was 
concluded for the peak erosion. Such a lowering of the erosion 
yield is expected, however, if carbon”’ and silicon” are admixed 
to the boron as happens in the deposition zone. The two lines in 
Figure 1 t are calculated from eqn (4) for the two limiting cases 
assuming that the sputter yields are valid also at the other radii. 
For simplicity, p = 6.5 x lO”cm- ’ is valid for a-C:D. The pres- 
ence of silicon in the deposition zone might lower the density” 
by about 10%. 
The curves fairly coincide with the measured deposition rates 
and part of the rates in the erosion dominated area which means 
- -2: 
q 3 
i&m 1 
a -6; 
-91 - D+-> B : 
-1o- n measured : I I I I 
47.4 4’7.6 47.0 48.0 48.2 48.4 
RADIAL DISTANCE [cm] 
Figure 10. Measured peak erosion rates (squares) depending on radial distance from the plasma center and the expected rates for a-B:D if a sputter 
yield of Y,, = 0.05 is assumed (thick line). The possible contributions by impurity sputtering (0: circles, C: squares) are negligible. 
927 
P Wienhold and F Weschenfelder: Measurements of thin film erosion and deposition 
g+ 1 , , I , ( , , fo, , , ~~eI;;;~:j ‘47.4 47.6 47.0 48.0 48.2 48.4 48.6 48.8 49.0 49.2 49.4 
RADIAL DISTANCE [cm] 
Figure 11. Intermediate rates (crosses) before ueak erosion is achieved and calculations according to the model eqn (4) with Yo = 0.01 (thick line) and 
I’,” = 0.006 (dashed line). 
that they can be understood as a difference between impurity 
deposition and hydrogen erosion. It seems that carbon (and sili- 
con) are deposited on the surface while the boron film thickness 
can decrease due to erosion. Since the impurity content reduces 
the erosion yield the pure a-B:D bulk is protected and its lifetime 
prolonged. 
Further into the erosion zone eqn (4) deviates more and more 
from the observed intermediate rates which become larger. At 
present we would not exclude that the erosion yield is not con- 
stant across the surface due to e.g. a changing impurity content. 
But, it is not clear by which process a protective layer of roughly 
20 nm thickness can currently be formed. Direct redeposition of 
boron ions or re-eroded carbon from other parts of the surface 
can be neglected during the ohmic phase because of the ionization 
length 1,: it is not shorter than about 30mm in the radial direc- 
tier? which is more than the radial range of the sample (22 mm). 
During the NB heated phase of the discharges, however, 1, =z 6 
mm for boron (or carbon) eroded with thermal energy at 
r = 47.5 cm, so some redeposition on the plasma near the end of 
the sample would be possible. Prompt redeposition of boron 
which remains neutral after the erosion cannot fully be excluded. 
Indeed, the post mortem analysis revealed boron concentrations 
of ~2 x lO”cm”, which would correspond to a thickness of 
z 20 nm. But, it is unclear whether an a-B:D film is formed since 
part of the aluminum interlayer is eroded here simultaneously. 
The redeposition as Al+ is unlikely because I, >9mm (NBI 
phase). 
Conclusions 
As a consequence of a ‘two-layer’ model with a thin a-C(Si)/B:D 
film on top of the a-B:D bulk the influence of different refractive 
constants n and different material densities p have to be 
considered. First calculations with n = 2.0 for the upper film and 
n = 2.7 for the bulk yield an increase of about 10% to be assumed 
for the total thicknesses in order to fit the measured hue values. 
Because this is due to the top layer only its thickness is larger by 
a factor of 1.6 and with it also the sputter yield Y,, in the model 
equation (4). Different densities (p = 6.5 x 102’ cm-’ for a-C/B:D 
and p = I .O x 10”cmp3 for a-B:D) have already been used in 
928 the discussion. But, if the density (and the according refractive 
constant) in the top film is as high as in the pure boron layer a 
factor of 1.8 would replace the factor 1.6. 
Both of the possibilities will not affect the major conclusion 
that the observed deposition and erosion rates can be described 
as a net effect between impurity deposition from the background 
plasma and erosion by hydrogen ions. This implies that a ‘two 
layer’ model is favored as a working hypothesis, i.e. the formation 
of a thin carbon/silicon-containing film on the virgin a-B:D. It 
prevents the pure boron from fast erosion because of the lower 
sputter erosion yield and prolongs its lifetime. Pure boron films 
in fusion devices are advantageous, however, because boron get- 
ters the oxygen impurities very effectively.‘4 Since the evaluation 
of the data (spectroscopy) and the post mortem analysis of the 
sample (EPMA, NRA, AES) are not yet fully finished it remains 
to be shown whether the deposit is stratified and whether prompt 
deposition of neutral boron plays a role. Moreover. the model 
has to explain the time dependence of the shift of the erosion 
edge across the declined surface. 
The lifetime of the boronization layer varies extremely between 
seconds and minutes and probably hours depending on the 
location, and even deposition zones are observed. This will be of 
importance for future fusion devices and for optimizing of feed 
rates and duty cycles of reactive gases used for the in situ repair 
of protecting coatings.” It shows that single observations at a 
particular location or time are not sufficient. In contrast, color- 
imetry allows the investigation of evolutions on large areas and 
provides the essential experimental information as a basis for 
model validation and the understanding of the processes. The 
influence of geometry can easily be investigated by changing the 
shape of the probe, 
Acknowledgements 
The authors very much acknowledge the readiness of Dr J von 
Seggern, IPP Jtilich, to help us with AES sputter depth profiles, 
of Dr B Emmoth, KTH Stockholm, for the NRA studies, and of 
Dr P Karduck, RWTH Aachen, for the EPMA analysis. They 
also thank for much technical help members of our working 
group and the TEXTOR team. 
P Wienhold and F Weschenfeldec Measurements of thin film erosion and deposition 
References 
’ P Wienhold. F Weschenfelder and J Winter, Nucl lnst and Methods in 
Phys Rrs, B94, 503 (1994). 
‘J Winter. H G Esser, L KBnen. V Philipps, H Reimer, J von Seggern. J 
Schliiter. E Vietzke, F Waelbroeck, P Wienhold, T Banno, D Ringer and 
S Vepi-ek. .I NW/ Maler, 162-164, 713 (1989). 
‘P Wienhold, F Waelbroeck. H Bergsaker, .I Winter and H G Esser. J 
Nut,/ Muter, 162-164, 369 (1989). 
“D Naujoks and R Behrisch, J Nrccl Muccr. 220-222, 227 (1995). 
‘G M McCracken, D H J Goodall. P C Stangeby, J P Coad, J Roth. B 
Denne and R Behrisch. J Nut,/ Ma/rr. 162-164, 356 (1989). 
‘M F A Harrison, E S Hotston and G P Maddison, NET Report EC’R- 
Fb:80:90-97 ( 1990). 
‘F Weschenfelder. G L Jackson, P Wienhold, J Winter, N H Brooks. W 
P West and R Lee. 22nd EPS Conf’on (‘untr Fusion and Plasma Pk~ts. Z- 
7 July 1995, Bournemouth, UK. 
“H Y Gou. X L L,i. J P Coad. L D Horton. J Lingertat, A Loarte. G F 
Matthews. R D Monk. M F Stamp and P C Stangeby, 22nd EPS Con/‘ 
on C’ontr Fusion untl Plr.v~~a Ph~x 2-7 July 1995, Bournemouth, UK. 
“A Bubenrer. B Dischler and A Nyaiesh, Pvoc of’ Syrup Laser Intlucrd 
II~~ln~crqc in Opficrrl ,Morc,riu/s. November l7- 18, 1981, Boulder, CO. 
USA. 
“‘P Wienhold J von Seggern. H G Esser, J Winter, H Bergsiker, M 
Rubel. I Gudc;wska and B Emmoth. J Nucl Mater, 176-177, 150 (1990). 
“M Born and E Wolf. Princ~ip/r,.v of’ OJ~tics. 6th edn. Pergamon Press, 
Oxford (1980. 
“D L MacAdam. (‘o/or Mrcrsur-enlvrrrs. Springer, Berlin (1981). 
“I Khandaker. E Glavas. K Morse. S Moruzzi and G R Jones, Vac~uum. 
49(l), 109 (1094). ‘“A Pospieszczyk. Diagnostics of edge plasmas by optical methods, In 
Plasma Phwic*s in Controlkd Thermonuckor Fusion. Janev and Drawin 
(Eds) (1993) p 213. 
15E Vietzke, V Philipps, K Flaskamp. J Winter. S Vepiek and P Koidl. 
10th Int Synp on Plasma Chem, August 4 9, 1991. Bochum. Germany. 
16V M Sharapov A I Kanaev. S Yu Rybakov and L E Gavrilov. J Nucl 
Mafo-, t20-222,‘930 (1995). 
“H Toyoda, T Isozum, H Sugai and T Okuda. J .\‘lrc,/ Marrr. 162-164, 
732 ( 1989). 
lXE Hechtl. A Mazanec, W Eckstein. J Roth and C Garcia-Rosnles. .I 
NW/ Marev. 198, 7 13 (1992). 
“A Pospieszczyk. V Philipps. E Casarotto. U Kiigler. B Schweer. B 
Unterberg. F Weschenfelder and G Y Diao. ?%(I EPS Coy/‘on (‘on/r 
Fusion und Plasma Phjx , 2~-7 July lYY5, Bournemouth, UK. 
‘“S Vepiek. S Rambert. M Heintze. F Mattenberger, M Jurcik-Rajman. 
W Portmann. D Ringer and U Stiefel. J Nzrc,/ Mure~,. 162-164. 714 ( 1989). 
“J Winter. H G Esser, G L Jackson. L Kdnen, V Philipps. A PospiesL- 
czyk. U Samm, B Schweer. B Unterberg. P Wienhold and TEXTOR 
Team. 20rlr EPS Conf’on Contr R’u.vior~ and P/rr.vmtr P/I~x 26 30 July 1993. 
Lisboa, Portugal. 
“J von Seggern. J Winter. L Grobusch. H G Ester. E Vietzke. F Wes- 
chenfelder. Ch Hollenstein. H Kiinzli. G G Ross and M Rubei. .I NM/ 
Maler, 220-222, 671 ( 1995). 
“D Naujoks, R Behrisch, J P Coad and L de Kock. N~rr,/ ~~/~,~ion. 33, 58 I 
(1993). 
“P Wienhold. J von Seggern. M Rubel. I Gudowska and H Kiinzli. 
Vnclrum. 43(5-7), 74s (1992). 
‘iH G Esser. J Winter. V Philipps. A Pospiesrczyk, J von Seggern. F 
Weschenfelder, P Wienhold, B Emmoth. M Rubel and TEXTOR Team. 
J Nnc,l Mafer. 220-222, 457 ( 1995). 
929 
