Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B I I7 (I 996) 42 I-427 
s __ _- i!B ELFEVIER NOM B Beam Interactions 
with Materials 8 Atoms 
UV quantum efficiencies of organic fluors 
C.H. Lally, G.J. Davies * , W.G. Jones, N.J.T. Smith 
Blucketi Luborurory. Imperiul College, Prince Consort Road. London, SW7 282. UK 
Received 2 1 November 1995; revised form received 13 February 1996 
Abstract 
The need for, and benefits of using, wavelength shifters with certain dark matter scintillator detectors is discussed. The 
dependence of conversion efficiency on thickness and incident wavelength is extensively investigated for evaporated 
coatings of p-terphenyl and tetraphenyl butadiene, and for plastic waveshifters based upon p-terphenyl. For the latter the 
effect of varying the p-terphenyl concentration is studied and some factors which must be considered when developing them 
for use in the UV are also discussed. 
1. Introduction 
Whereas dark matter detectors based on ionization in 
semiconductors and low temperature bolometric tech- 
niques have been under study since 1985 [I], only recently 
has the use of scintillators become widespread [2]. They 
are suitable for scale-up (and hence annual modulation 
experiments) and may offer significant discrimination of 
the nuclear recoil signal from the background 
electron/gamma events via differences in the pulse shape 
of the scintillation light [3]. As the expected energy deposit 
for a recoiling nucleus from a dark matter event is small, 
scintillators with high light output, such as liquid xenon 
(LXe) and sodium iodide (NaI) are required. Thus the most 
important parameter limiting sensitivity in these detectors 
becomes the light collection efficiency, as this determines 
the achievable energy threshold and the discriminatory 
power. However, because all or some of the scintillation 
light is in the UV region for both detectors (175 nm for 
LXe and 300 nm for pure NaI) several problems can arise 
in achieving a good collection efficiency: 
(I) UV sensitive photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) are 
required which are more radioactive necessitating a long 
(y 30 cm) lightguide. 
(2) The lightguides needed to separate the PMTs from 
the target lose light through high UV attenuation and poor 
UV reflectance. 
(3) Light will not emerge from the target vessel due to 
the poor UV reflectance of the walls. 
* Corresponding author. Fax: (44) I71 823 8830, E-mail: 
g.j.davies@ic.ac.uk. These problems can be avoided and substantial gains in 
light collection made if the light is shifted to the visible 
region via a wavelength shifter (WLS). These fluors ab- 
sorb light in the UV and re-emit at longer wavelengths. 
Some aromatic organic compounds fluoresce when their 
n-orbital electrons are excited, either by ionizing particles 
or UV radiation [4]. Electrons excited to the vibrational 
states of the first excited state (S,) relax within picosec- 
onds to the lowest lying level of S, before decaying to the 
ground state with the radiation of a photon at the com- 
pound’s characteristic emission wavelength, see Fig. I. In 
plastic scintillators, the binder in which the WLS is dis- 
solved, must also have a n-electron saucture, and absorbs 
the incident energy. If the concentration of the wavelength 
shifting solute is high enough this energy is transferred by 
non-radiative dipole-dipole interactions to its excited lev- 
els producing fluorescence [5]. The transfer is efficient if 
there is good overlap between the binder’s emission spec- 
trum and the absorption spectrum of the solute. Energy 
transfer to further solutes is possible, allowing the final 
light to be shifted to even longer wavelengths. 
Traditionally these fluors have been applied by vacuum 
evaporation from powder form and so can be applied 
directly to crystal faces, target vessel walls or the front 
face of lightguides or photomultipliers [6]. It is possible to 
tune the final emission wavelength of the shifter to a 
detector’s optimum sensitivity (u 400 nm for a conven- 
tional photomultiplier) either directly by selecting a single 
suitable compound or by adding a secondary shifter to 
further increase the final wavelength of the light (a ternary 
system). More recently they have been dissolved in plastic 
binders offering greater rigidity, higher wavelength shifter 
concentrations and making the production of ternary sys- 
terns easier. 
0168-583X/96/$15.00 Copyright 0 1996 Published by Elsevier Science All rights reserved 
PII SO 168-583X(96)0031 8-7 
422 C.H. Lully et ul./Nucl. Instr. cmd Meth. in Phys. Res. B II7 (1996) 42/-427 
$2: 
s, ‘- so0 -- k c 2 ‘Z .Y 
iu E w 
. - - - 
. - - - 
.--- - 
Fig. I. Energy levels of an organic molecule with ff-electron 
structure. _---__ 
.----- 
.----- 
.---__ We have produced evaporated samples of p-terphenyl 
(TPH) and tetraphenyl butadiene (TPB) and obtained plas- 
tic samples, based upon TPH, of varying thickness from 
NE Technologies [7] and BICRON [8]. For each we have 
measured its conversion efficiency as a function of inci- 
dent wavelength and its emission spectrum. 
2. Method 
Coatings of a range of thicknesses were produced using 
the evaporation chamber shown in Fig. 2. The wavelength 
shifting powder is heated in a nickel foil boat and the 
evaporated fluor is deposited on a glass slide near the top 
of the evacuated chamber. The thickness of the coating is 
controlled by interposing a mechanical shutter in front of 
the glass slide when the attenuation of a light beam by the 
coated slide has reached a pre-set level. Samples whose 
thicknesses have been measured directly by weighing are 
used to obtain the light attenuation coefficient from a plot 
of light attenuation against thickness. The evaporations 
were made at a pressure of l-l.5 X IO-’ Torr; improving 
the vacuum to I X 10m2 Torr did not improve the conver- 
sion efficiency of the fluors. TPB goes through a liquid 
Detector - 
(silicon diode) - Filter 
Glass slide to be 
Motor to rotate 
* w 
35 cm 
Fig. 2. Evaporation chamber. 
C.H. Lally et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 117 (1996) 421-427 423 
phase when heated whereas TPH sublimes; the bubbling light from a deuterium lamp (D,) passes through a 185 nm 
which occurs during this liquid phase can lead to poor interference filter (25 nm FWHM bandwidth) onto the 
quality coatings unless controlled. Thus the heating profile WLS. The emitted (isotropic) light is then focused by a 
for TPB must be adjusted according to the amount of lens, via the grating, onto a calibrated photomultiplier 
powder to be evaporated making it a more difficult com- tube. We needed to use a PMT instead of a diode as the 
pound to evaporate uniformly. amount of shifted light reaching the exit was very low. 
The plastic samples were based upon a primary WLS 
of TPH of varying concentration, with POPOP as the usual 
secondary shifter, in a polyvinyltoluene (PVT) binder. 
Thicknesses of 40 pm to 5 mm were tested. 
We have measured the output spectrum of the WLS 
using a specially adapted monochromator (Fig. 3a): The The conversion efficiency of the WLS is measured 
using the monochromator but in a different configuration 
(Fig. 3b): This time the light from the D, lamp passes 
directly to the grating which is set to reflect a particular 
wavelength of light onto the monochromator exit. This 
light is then first measured by a calibrated, UV sensitive 
diode (to calculate the flux of UV photons at the exit) and 
then, after rotating the diode mount, is shone onto the 
WLS sample which is fixed directly in front of a second 
calibrated diode (from which we can estimate the flux of 
wavelength shifted photons). The external quantum effi- 
ciency (defined as the number of photons emitted divided 
by the number of incident photons) can then be calculated 
by correcting for the different active areas of the two 
diodes, the quantum efficiencies of the diodes at the 
relevant wavelengths, the solid angle of the isotropic shifted 
light that the second diode ‘sees’, and the various reflec- 
tive and refractive processes that the shifted light under- 
goes before reaching the diode surface. Values of 1.3 and 
1.5 were taken for the refractive indices of the evaporated 
coatings and plastics, respectively. Although these correc- 
tion factors can carry significant systematic errors, they are 
the same for each type of shifter (evaporated or plastic) 
and hence a comparison of different evaporated or plastic 
shifters is insensitive to them. (4 Calibrated PMT 
n 
I 
Grating I Deuterium Lamp 
WLS Sample 
Calibrated Diodes 
Rotatable Mount 
, 
Grating Deuterium Lamp 
Fig. 3. (a) Schematic of monochromator set-up for measuring 
emission spectra. (b) Schematic of monochromator set-up for 
measuring conversion efficiency. The self-attenuation of the evaporated coatings was 
tested by illuminating them with light whose wavelength 
equalled that at their peak emission. 
3. Results 
Fig. 4a, b gives the emission spectra for TPH and TPB 
and is in fairly good agreement with earlier measurements 
quoted in the literature [7,9]. We have observed that, as 
would be expected, this emission spectrum does not vary 
with WLS thickness or wavelength of incident light (even 
for light incident with a higher energy than the fluors 
primary absorption band). 
Fig. 5a, b shows their external quantum efficiency for 
incident light of 175 nm versus thickness. The errors here, 
as for all other graphs, are dominated by the systematic 
uncertainty (- 15%) in the quantum efficiencies of the 
diodes arising from the uncertainties in the intensity of the 
light source with which they were calibrated. We took 
advantage of TPH’s more gentle decrease in efficiency 
with thickness to make a crude evaporation onto the 
cylindrical walls of a small LXe test cell (a protective 
transparent layer of magnesium fluoride was placed over 
424 C.H. Lally et at./Nuci. Imtr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. 3 117 (1996) 421-427 
the shifter to prevent contamination of the LXe). Scintilla- 
tion light was observed but some of the TPH migrated to 
unprotected surfaces. Whilst this problem is solvable it 
illustrates an advantage of plastic shifters over evaporated 
coatings. 
Fig. 6a, b shows the transmittance of TPH and TPB 
coatings at their emission wavelengths (335 nm and 440 
nm, respectively) as a function of thickness. Clearly the 
attenuation of the longer light by the TPB is far greater 
than the attenuation of the shorter light by the TPH. 
Fig. 7a, b shows the external quantum efficiency as a 
function of wavelength for two samples of approximately 
optimum thickness. We believe the peak in the efficiency 
of TPH at about 260 nm corresponds to this fluor’s S, 
absorption peak (i.e. transitions from the ground state to 
the first excited state) which occurs at this wavelength [4]. 
The absorption of light by TPB is far more rapid than by 
TPH, as supported by Fig. 5 and 6, and all the incident 
light at all wavelengths is fully absorbed by the sample. 
Thus, in contrast to TPH, we believe we cannot directly 
see the fluor’s absorption peaks; the 5, absorption peak for 
TPB occurs at about 340 nm [4]. Mechanisms (M,) exist 
[4] whereby a molecule which absorbs an incident photon 
of energy greater than that required to excite a single 
electron to the lowest S, level can excite a further electron 
1 50( 
Wavelength (nm) 
a ~~~~~~~~_.~..~_~~~L 
450 500 550 
Wavelength (nm) 
Fig. 4. Emission spectra for TPH and TPB with 185 nm wave- 
length incident light. 08 1 1.2 1.4 
Thickness br+-n?) 
0.5 0.6 0.7 
Thickness (mg/cm? 
Fig. 5. External quantum efficiency versus thickness of TPH and 
TPB for 175 nm incident light. 
in a neighboring molecule. These processes can be qualita- 
tively represented by 
s **+s+s*+s*, 
where S signifies a WLS molecule. For M, to be signifi- 
cant, the molecular density must be high and the time 
taken for the usual thermal dissipation of this excess 
energy relatively long. We suggest that, as one approaches 
the energy required for excitation to 5, (the second excited 
energy level) the likelihood of M, increases. However, the 
higher energy S, vibrational states will be shorter lived 
and fall more rapidly to the lowest S, level. Therefore, for 
a given molecular density, there will be an optimum 
energy at which these further excitations can occur. Thus 
we conjecture that the greater than 100% external quantum 
efficiency peaks at 175 nm and - 275 nm for TPH and 
TPB in Figs. 5a and 7b respectively are explained by the 
above processes. 
A number of the TPH and TF’B samples were repeat- 
edly retested over a six month period. During this time 
they were sealed in petri dishes and kept in a dark cup- 
board (to avoid the large degradation which would result 
from a continuous exposure to sunlight). Fig. 8a, b shows 
C.H. Lally et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B II? (19%) 421-427 425 
the ageing effects at the end of this period due to oxidation 
and hydration for the two fluors, random errors are shown 
only. The deterioration occurred steadily and is worse at 
the optimum thickness of the WLS and corresponds to a 
decrease in efficiency of lo-1.5%. It should be noted that, 
in contrast to some previous published results 161, the 
ageing of TPB appears to be no worse than that of TPH. 
Fig. 9 shows the external quantum efficiency versus 
wavelength for three of the plastic shifters. The random 
error alone is plotted on the lower graph to illustrate the 
significance of the differences between the samples. The 
most efficient plastic, denoted by ‘0.2 mm, 30% enriched 
TPH’, contained 30% more p-terphenyl than usual and 
was 0.2 mm thick. The conversion efficiency decreases as 
either the concentration of TPH is decreased, see the curve 
‘0.2 mm’, or as the thickness of the sample is increased, 
see curve ‘2 mm 30% enriched TPH’. As mentioned 
previously, for a plastic wavelength shifter, the energy is 
absorbed by the binder and transferred non-radiatively to 
the primary shifter, TPH in our case. As this process is of 
a finite range, and the concentration of TPH limited, one is 
sensitive to the structure of its absorption spectrum. We 
believe that the resulting external quantum efficiency ver- 
sus wavelength curve can be explained as follows: 
1 1.2 1 .4 
Thickness (mg/cm*) 
0:2 0:3 
Thickness (mg/cm2) 
Fig. 6. Transmittance of TPH and TPB versus thickness at their 
respective emission wavelengths. 200 220 240 260 260 
Wavelength km) 
160 200 240 280 320 360 
Wavelength (nm) 
Fig. 7. External quantum efficiency versus incident wavelength 
for TPH and TPB for two samples of approximately optimum 
thickness. 
For incident wavelengths around 280 nm the energy is 
absorbed by the S, vibrational states of the PVT. and with 
little energy loss falls to the S, ground state from where it 
is efficiently transferred to the broad S, absorption peak of 
the TPH at 280 nm. 
For incident wavelengths around 210 nm, the energy is 
absorbed by the S, vibrational states of the PVT. and with 
more significant loss falls to the S, ground state which is 
at a lower energy than the very narrow S, absorption peak 
in the TPH at 210 nm. Indeed, as the TPH has a minimum 
in absorption at 230 nm, the energy transfer to the TPH is 
inefficient and the resulting conversion efficiency low in 
this wavelength region. 
However, for incident wavelengths around 170 nm, the 
energy absorption proceeds via the S, states in the PVT. 
which lie at slightly higher energy than the TPH S, states, 
allowing efficient energy transfer to the TPH S, energy 
level. Thus we see an increase in the conversion efficiency 
in this region. 
As the concentration of TPH is increased so is the 
efficiency of the energy transfer from the PVT to it; thus 
higher TPH concentrations yield higher conversion effi- 
ciencies. Some of the light emitted by the POPOP i.e. light 
426 C.H. Lally et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B I17 (1996) 421-427 
_c Original QE 
(1 b Liui-L -i-u ..-. i-L-uLiuL-.- -i 0 0.1 0.2 03 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 
Thickness (mg/cm2) 
Fig. 8. Deterioration in efficiency of TPH and TPB after a six 
month period (175 nm incident light). 
at the final, detected wavelength (- 400 nm) will be 
absorbed by the PVT. Hence, as all wavelengths of inci- 
dent light are absorbed within the first few tens of microns, 
the ‘0.2 mm 30% enriched TPH’ sample is more efficient 
than the corresponding 2 mm one due to reduced absorp- 
tion of the 400 nm light by the PVT. The absorption of 
light in the PVT was confirmed by measuring the transmit- 
tance of a pure PVT sample, see Fig. 10. The transmit- 
tance below 295 nm is consistent with zero. 
To further investigate the possible improvement with 
thinner plastic binders, enriched 100 pm samples and 40 
pm samples with the usual TPH concentrations were 
tested. Fig. 11 shows the result for one of the 100 pm 
thick samples. The attenuation length ( - 20 mm at - 400 
nm) calculated from Fig. 10 would suggest that there 
should be little difference between the enriched 200 and 
100 pm samples as is indeed observed at wavelengths 
above - 240 nm. There is however a significant improve- 
ment at the shortest wavelengths. The efficiency of the 40 
pm thick samples was considerably less, especially at the 
shortest wavelengths, than that of the 0.2 mm sample with 
the equivalent TPH concentration. These two effects can 
be explained in terms of depletion regions which contain 
little or no TPH. These have been observed by the manu- 0.2 mm 30% enriched TPH 
60 
40 
20 
170 190 210 230 250 270 290 310 
Wavelength (nm) 
Fig. 9. External quantum efficiency versus wavelength for TPH + 
POPOP of varying concentration in PVT binders of different 
thicknesses. 
facturer to form at the faces of the plastic binder when 
either very thin samples with the usual TPH concentrations 
are produced directly (i.e. the 40 pm samples) or when 
samples with very high TPH concentrations of any thick- 
ness are produced. 
Thus we suggest the effect of the depletion regions in 
the 40 p.m samples is more strongly felt by the shorter 
60 
0 
200 250 300 350 400 450 560 
Wavelength (nm) 
Fig. 10. Transmittance versus wavelength of a 10 mm pure PVT 
sample. 
C.H. Lally et al./ Nucl. Instr. und Meth. in Phys. Res. B I I7 (1996) 421-427 427 
0 1 1~‘~1~‘~‘~1~1~‘~/~1”~‘,‘~‘~’ 170 190 210 230 250 270 290 310 
Wavelength (nm) 
Fig. 11. External quantum efficiency versus wavelength for an 
enriched TPH + POPOP sample in a I00 pm PVT binder. 
wavelengths because, as they are absorbed more rapidly in 
the PVT, they are unable to reach the undepleted region. 
The 100 pm enriched .samples were produced by com- 
pressing thicker samples. As a result of this thinning 
process, the depth of the depletion regions in the 100 pm 
samples was reduced such that short wavelengths are able 
to traverse it. 
We have recently successfully operated plastic wave- 
length shifter disks in the cooled (160 K), pure NaI 
(scintillation at 300 and 420 nm) detector as used under- 
ground. The disks were placed between the crystal and the 
lightguides. The discrimination achieved with non-UV sen- 
sitive tubes was equal to that with UV sensitive ones, 
indicating that the latter can be replaced with lower back- 
ground tubes in conjunction with a WLS. Furthermore, 
their lower radioactivity means that the lightguides can be 
shortened, improving the light collection and hence both 
the experiments sensitivity and discriminatory power. 
4. Conclusions 
As expected, the conversion efficiency of both TPB and 
TPH is high at very short wavelengths [6,10,11]. Thus both 
fluors should allow the construction of a detector without 
needing a UV reflector, although TPH would require a 
secondary shifter for use with a low activity borosilicate 
PMT this is most easily achieved with a plastic shifter. 
The optimum thicknesses are 0.3 mg/cm2 for TPH and 
0.07 mg/cm2 for TPB, similar to previous measurements 
although there is variation in the literature [6,1 l]. The 
thinner optimum thickness and faster fall-off of TPB are 
easily explained by its greater self-attenuation as seen from 
Fig. 6. 
The efficiency of the plastic shifters is maximised by 
using the highest possible TPH concentration. Although it 
is better to reduce the binder thickness as much as possible 
care must be taken as to how this is done; it would appear that the best method is simply to compress thicker samples 
to minimise the depth of any depletion regions. 
An interesting possibility currently under investigation 
is a plastic shifter based upon TPB alone. Such a shifter 
would not need a secondary fluor as the TPB emits 
directly at 440 nm, thus avoiding the loss of efficiency in 
the transfer from primary to secondary shifter and perhaps 
benefiting from the greater overlap of the TPB and PVT 
energy levels. An extension of this, as suggested in [12], 
would be a mixture of shifters with overlapping absorption 
bands to minimise the poor overlap between PVT and a 
single fluor at certain wavelengths. 
Acknowledgements 
We gratefully thank NE and BICRON for their plastic 
waveshifter samples. We sincerely thank the mechanical 
and electrical workshops in the HEP group for the con- 
struction of the evaporation chamber, and in particular M. 
Khalecq and V. Kasey for their assistance in producing the 
samples; our thanks also go to S. Jagger for her help and 
good humor. GJD would like to acknowledge the support 
of PPARC under the post doctoral fellowship scheme. 
References 
[I] P.F. Smith and J.D. Lewin, Phys. Rep. 187 (1990) 203; 
J. Primack et al., Ann. Rev. Nucl. Sci. 38 ( 1988) 75 1. 
[2] P.F. Smith, Review talk, 227, Proc. 1st Intern. Symp. on 
Sources of Dark Matter in the Universe, ed. D. Cline (World 
Scientific, Singapore, 1995); 
C. Bacci et al., Phys. Lett. B 293 (1992) 460; 
G. Gerbier, Proc. XXVI Rencontrc de Moriond (Editions 
Frontieres, Gif-mu-Yvette) p. 470. 
[3] G.J. Davies, J.D. Davies, J.D. Lewin, P.F. Smith and W.G. 
Jones, Phys. Lett. B 320 (1994) 395; 
N.J.C. Spooner and P.F. Smith, Phys. Lett. B 314 (19931 
430. 
[4] X. Berlman, Handbook of Fluorescence Spectra of Aromatic 
Molecules, 2nd Ed. (Academic Press, New York). 
[5] Th. Forster, Ann. Physik. 2 (1948) 55. 
[6] M. Brunet, M. Cantin, C. Julliot and J. Vasseur, J. Phys. 
Appl. 24 (1%3) 53a. 
[7] NE Technology ltd., Bankhead Medway. Sighthill Industrial 
Estate, Edinburgh, EHl 1 4BY. 
[8] BICRON, P.O. Box 3093, 3760 DB Soest, The Netherlands; 
BICRON, 12345 Kinsman Road, Newbury, OH 44065, USA. 
[9] T.A. DeVol, D.K. Wehe and G.F. Knoll, Nucl. Instr. and 
Meth. A 327 (1993) 354. 
[lo] Trinh Thi Hoang Mai and R. Doubt, Appl. Opt. IO (1971) 
207. 
[I 11 M. Grande and G.R. Moss, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 215 (1983) 
539. 
[ 121 W. Viehamnn and R.L. Frost, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 167 
( 1979) 405. 
