~llk'} ~ll,tl i i I 
Effect of rotation on temperature response 
of thermochromic liquid crystal 
B. J. Syson, R. G. Pilbrow, and J. M. Owen 
School of Mechanical Engineering, University of Bath, Bath, UK 
Encapsulated thermochromic liquid crystal (TLC) can be used to determine the surface 
temperature of stationary or rotating bodies. For narrow-band TLC, with a colour change 
from red to blue over a bandwidth of 1°C, temperatures on stationary surfaces can be 
measured with an uncertainty of around +0.1°C. For gas turbine applications, where 
centripetal accelerations in excess of 104g are common, there is a belief held by many 
research workers that TLC is significantly affected by rotation: "rotational shifts" have 
been observed where temperature measurements made by thermocouples and TLC diverge 
with increasing rotational speed; shifts up to 7°C at around 104g have been observed. In 
this paper, the surface temperature of a rotating disc is measured simultaneously by an 
infrared (IR) thermal imager and wide-band TLC with an effective temperature range from 
48 to 58°C. Within the uncertainty of the measurements, which was around 0.5°C, it was 
concluded that there was no significant rotational shift for accelerations up to 16,000g. 
Keywords: thermochromic liquid crystal; temperature measurement; rotation 
1. Introduction 
The use of encapsulated thermochromic liquid crystal (TLC) in 
heat transfer experiments is now a well-established practice. By 
spraying a thin film of microcapsules of TLC onto a solid 
material, the surface temperature can be measured accurately. 
Unlike thermocouples or other intrusive devices, TLC creates no 
local thermal disturbance errors and enables the temperature of 
the entire surface to be measured. Unlike infrared (IR) detectors, 
no special windows (such as germanium) are required for study- 
ing the heat transfer in internal flows: windows made from glass, 
acrylic, or polycarbonate provide adequate optical access. 
Most research workers use narrow-band TLC that changes 
colour from red to blue during a small change in temperature 
(typically I°C). Using a single colour (say yellow) in this range, 
the surface temperature can be measured with an uncertainty of 
around +0.1°C. Narrow-band TLC has been used successfully 
(see, for example, Jones and Hippensteele 1988; Camci et al. 
1992; Wang et al. 1995) to determine the heat transfer coeffi- 
cients for an acrylic model suddenly exposed to a step-change in 
air temperature. If the initial temperature of the model at time 
t = 0 is known, and the temperature at some later time is 
determined from the TLC then the so-called one-dimensional 
(l-D) semi-infinite slab solution can be used to determine the 
heat transfer coefficient. 
Metzger et al. (1991) have shown that the TLC technique can 
also be applied to a rotating disc. In the experiments, an (initially 
cold) acrylic disc coated with TLC was suddenly exposed to an 
impinging jet of hot air. Using this technique, the authors were 
Address reprint requests to Prof. J. M. Owen, School of Mechan- 
ical Engineering, University of Bath, Bath BA27AY, UK. 
Received 7 November 1995; accepted 10 April 1996 
Int. J. Heat and Fluid Flow 17:491-499, 1996 
© 1996 by Elsevier Science Inc. 
655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010 able to determine the axisymmetric heat transfer coefficients for 
the rotating disc, albeit at relatively low rotational speeds. For 
rotational speeds representative of those found in gas turbines, 
however, the centripetal accelerations can be of the order of 
104g, where g is the gravitational acceleration, and there is a 
suspicion among many research workers that the characteristics 
of TLC change when it is exposed to these very high accelera- 
tions. 
Recently, Camci and Glezer (1995), working in the United 
States, found evidence of a rotational shift between temperatures 
obtained using narrow-band TLC and thermocouples. The re- 
suits, measured on a rotating disc, diverged as the speed in- 
creased, and at around 10,000g the rotational shift could be as 
high as 7°C. Subsequent results, presented by Camci and Glezer, 
were obtained using an infrared detector: the IR and TLC 
readings were in good agreement but both diverged from the 
thermocouple measurements. The rotational shift was attributed 
to a thermal disturbance error associated with the thermocouple. 
Their work, which has a clear relationship with the research 
presented here, will be published elsewhere. 
While Camci and Glezer (1995) were investigating the rota- 
tional shift with narrow-band TLC in the United States, indepen- 
dent research on wide-band TLC was being carried out at the 
University of Bath in the UK. Thermocouples, TLC, and an 
infrared thermal imager were used to measure the surface tem- 
perature of a rotating disc subject to accelerations in excess of 
104g. It is this work that is presented here. 
The experimental apparatus is outlined in Section 2 and the 
thermochromic liquid crystals, image-processing, and calibration 
apparatus are described in Section 3. The calibration of the TLC 
and IR imager in a stationary frame, and the measurements on 
the rotating disc, are presented and discussed in Section 4. The 
principal conclusions are given in Section 5. 
0142-727X/96/$15,00 
PII S0142-727x(96)00053-8 

Rotation effects on fiquid crystals." B. J, Syson et al. 
2. Experimental apparatus 
2.1. Rotating-disc rig 
A sectional view of the rotating-disc rig is shown in Figure 1 and 
the rotor instrumentation in Figure 2. The whole assembly can 
be rotated up to 7000 rpm by a variable speed electric motor, and 
the speed can be measured with an uncertainty of + 1 rpm by an 
electromagnetic transducer and timer-counter. The steel disc 
can be heated up to 150°C by thyristor-controlled radiant heaters, 
and the surface temperature measured by copper-constantan 
thermocouples embedded in the disc. (The rig is usually used for 
preswirl rotor-stator tests, see Wilson et al. (1995), and the 
fluxmeters and blade-cooling holes shown in Figure 2 were not 
used in the tests described below.) 
The rotor is of composite construction comprising a steel 
front disc and an aluminum back disc separated by a layer of 
Rohacell lightweight foam insulation. The front face of the steel 
disc, which is 580-mm diameter, is covered with a 1-mm-thick 
layer of glass-fibre epoxy-resin (k = 0.3 W/mK). This "glass-fibre 
mat" is slotted to enable the thermocouples and fluxmeters to be 
embedded in its surface without creating stress concentrations 
and thermal disturbances in the steel disc. The wires from the 
thermocouples and fluxmeters are brought out in slots in the mat 
to the connector pins at the centre of the disc, as shown in 
Figure 1. The pins act as an effective cold junction, and the 
electrical signals are brought out through copper wires connected 
to a 24-way slip ring assembly. The voltages are measured, with a 
resolution of _+ 1 ixV, by a computer-controlled datalogger. 
The glass-fibre mat was sprayed with black paint with an 
emissivity of e = 0.96 (estimated using the infrared thermal im- 
ager described below). An annular area, extending from 220 < 
r < 290 ram, was coated with thermochromic liquid crystal, details 
of which are given in Section 3. 2.2, Infrared thermal imager 
A cutaway view of the Agema 870C infrared scanner used in the 
tests is shown in Figure 3. Essentially, the scanner converts the 
electromagnetic radiation from an object into electronic video 
signals, and the scanner and its associated hardware and software 
are referred to as the infrared thermal imager. The basic princi- 
ple of operation is described below. 
The radiation from an object is focused by an infrared lens 
onto an oscillating mirror. The scanner may be used with a 
variety of interchangeable lenses, but for the tests described 
below, a 20 ° (38-mm) lens was fitted. This lens has germanium 
broadband optics coated for enhanced response in the 2.0-4.0 
t~m region of the infrared spectrum. The reflected radiation from 
the oscillating mirror is focused by three fixed mirrors onto a 
horizontal polygon mirror which rotates at 15,000 rpm. Both the 
oscillating and rotating mirrors are microprocessor-controlled 
and synchronised so that the whole of the object in view is 
effectively scanned as a 70-line field at a rate of 25 fields/s. 
These fields are phased so that four fields produce one fully 
interlaced 280-line frame. The reflected beam from the horizon- 
tal mirror is passed through a set of relay optics (containing a 
selectable aperture and filter unit) and focused onto a point 
detector by a concave mirror, as shown in Figure 3. For all tests 
reported here, the scanner's aperture was left fully open, and no 
filter was inserted. 
The scanner uses a SPRITE single-point infrared detector 
consisting of a strip of mercury cadmium telluride, which is 
sensitive to radiation between 2 and 5 i~m, mounted on a 
sapphire substrate. The detector is cooled by a three-stage ther- 
moelectric Peltier element to a temperature of -70°C. The 
output signal from the detector is sent to an external amplifica- 
tion and control unit, and the video output signal from this unit 
is processed on a PC by the Agema CATSE software. This 
~OPI[C LIOUID CRYST 
STEEL ROTO~ 
CLASS FIBRE EPOXY RSSIPI 
C~IlnEcTOR PI 
Figure I Rotating-disc rig . "BLADE COOLIIIG' PASSAGE 
DISC 
~ FLUTED ROHAGELL OISC 
/ / 
, ;' I / oelv~ .stuFf 
~./~ I 
cEKrRAL TUBE 
24-CHAttEL SLIP RIPIC ^SSEI'~Y 
.1_ 
492 Int. J. Heat and Fluid Flow, Vol. 17, No. 5, October 1996 

Rotation effects on liquid crystals: B. J. Syson et al. 
UL~UC ~tlULJll~ nOL= 
ITHERNOCOUPLE 
Figure 2 Instrumented rotating disc HEAT FLUXHETER 
software generates a 140 × 140 pixel orthogonal image of the 
object in view, and an image datafile is generated to transmit the 
data from the PC to a Silicon Graphics workstation for postpro- 
cessing. 
The scanner is also capable of a line-scanning mode in which 
the oscillating mirror is locked in one position, and horizontal 
lines are scanned by the rotating mirror. The scanner can be 
positioned relative to the rotating disc so that radial lines will be 
scanned as the disc rotates, and the angular location of the lines 
can be determined by the software, using a trigger on the drive 
shaft of the rig. This mode enables the circumferential tempera- 
ture distribution of the disc to be determined. Although the 
line-scanning mode has been used, no significant angular varia- 
tions in temperature or thermal disturbances were found. For the 
tests described below, the standard orthogonal scanning mode 
was used; this produces a circumferentially averaged value of 
temperature. 
The manufacturer's specified absolute accuracy for the scan- 
ner is + 2% or + 2°C, whichever is the larger, and the stated 
resolution at 60°C (which corresponds to the top of the range 
covered by the wide-band TLC) is 0.07°C. To improve the accu- racy, an average of 20 consecutive frames was taken for each 
test, and the scanner was calibrated using the copper-block 
apparatus described in Section 3. 
3. Thermochromic liquid crystals, image 
processing, and calibration apparatus 
3. I. Thermochromic liquid crystal 
Thermochromic coatings used for surface thermography usually 
exploit the properties of chiral nematic liquid crystal. This phase 
is characterised by a helical molecular structure, the periodicity 
of which governs the way in which it reflects light. When illumi- 
nated with white light, the liquid crystal selectively reflects 
monochromatic light whose wavelength is equal to the pitch of its 
helical structure. The liquid crystal will exhibit thermochromic 
properties if its pitch (and, hence, the wavelength of light it 
reflects) is a function of temperature. Usually the wavelength of 
light reflected decreases with increasing temperature: the colour 
changes from red, through the visible spectrum, to blue/violet. 
Int. J. Heat and Fluid Flow, Vol. 17, No. 5, October 1996 493 

Rotation effects on liquid crystals." B. J. Syson et aL 
Figure 3 Oscillating Mirror 3 Fixed Mirrors 
Rotating Polygon Mirror 
Cutaway view of Agema thermal scanner (reproduced by permission of Agema UK) 
The liquid crystal is supplied in microcapsules: tiny droplets 
of liquid crystal are encased in polymer shells. In this form, the 
liquid crystal is easy to use and is isolated from the deleterious 
effects of solvents and impurities, and to ensure good adhesion, 
the microcapsules are mixed with a binder prior to application. 
Saturated colours are achieved by initially spraying the surface 
black so that most of the light which passes through the coating 
is not reflected back. Despite this precaution, the light reflected 
will not be purely monochromatic: some light will be reflected by 
the black paint and non-liquid-crystal constituents of the coating. 
The typical spectral content of the reflected light is shown in 
Figure 4a. 
While the instrumentation must resolve the light reflected by 
the TLC coating, it must also provide sufficient spatial and 
temporal resolution. Although a spectrometer would be ideal for 
analysing the reflected light, colour CCD (charge coupled device) 
imagers are used, because they satisfy the stringent spatial and 
temporal requirements of most heat transfer work. A CCD, 
however, is essentially a monochrome device: it is sensitive to a 
range of wavelengths of light, but embodies no mechanism for 
discriminating between wavelengths within that range. The spec- 
tral resolution required for colour imaging is provided by the use 
of coloured filters. A typical colour CCD consists of a matrix of 
pixels sensitive to visible light, overlaid with a mosaic of red, 
green, and blue filters. Each pixel is then sensitive to a particular 
part of the visible spectrum, as dictated by the filter's response 
and sensitivity. While the signals from three adjacent pixels (one 
red, one green, and one blue) are sufficient to determine the 
colour (that is, the effect on the human eye) of incident light, 
detailed spectral information about the light is lost. 
Fortunately, in the case of light reflected by a TLC coating, 
the general form of the spectral content can be approximated by 
a monochromatic spike plus background white light, as shown in 
Figure 4b. This approximation reduces the number of degrees- 
of-freedom to three: namely, hue (a measure of the wavelength 
of the monochromatic spike), saturation (the relative amounts of 
monochromatic and white light), and intensity (the total amount 
of light). Because colour can be described using three indepen- 
dent variables (usually the components red, green, and blue), the 
spectral content of the reflected light, and in particular its hue, 
can be estimated. Hue analysis of frames captured by colour spectral density 
increasing tcrap~ratu~ 
q 1 raormchromatl¢ slnk¢ 
II ba~und 
'white' fight 
It wavelength blue red 
(a)'lX/picalspectvam. 
spectrld density 
monochromatk intensity 
'white' intensity 
mon0d,aom~c 
wa~hingth It wavelength 
(b) Approximate spectrum. 
Figure 4 Spectral content of light reflected by TLC coating 
CCD imagers is best performed by computer, and because the 
HSI (hue, saturation, and intensity) colour model is often used as 
an alternative to the RGB (red, green, and blue) model, hard- 
ware and software for RGB to HSI conversion are readily 
available. 
The same equipment was used to determine the reflective 
properties of the TLC coating for the stationary calibration and 
for all rotational tests. The TLC (Hallcrest R45C10W) changed 
from red at 45°C to dark blue at 55°C. The coating was illumi- 
494 Int. J. Heat and Fluid Flow, Vol. 17, No. 5, October 1996 

nated by a tungsten-filament lamp and the reflected light moni- 
tored by a Panasonic WV-CL700 colour CCD video camera 
fitted with an 18-108 mm t2.5 zoom lens, and the illumination 
and viewing angles are shown in Figure 5. The ensuing YC video 
signal was recorded on SVHS videotape by a Panasonic AG-7355 
video cassette recorder, and the video frames were analyzed by a 
Silicon Graphics Indigo R3000 workstation fitted with a video 
board. RGB to HSI conversion was performed using software 
from the lmageVision image-processing library, and additional 
image manipulation and data-processing routines were written 
in-house. 
3.2. Image processing 
Despite the fundamental difference between infrared and liq- 
uid-crystal temperature measurement, both techniques used were 
imaging systems and as such required similar processing. Being 
PC-based, images from the IR thermal imaging system were 
easily transferred to the Silicon Graphics workstation so that the 
same software could be used to process both the IR and TLC 
images. Details of this processing, which is an extension of that 
described by Wilson et al. (1993), are outlined below. 
In the TLC calibration and the rotational tests, no data were 
taken until a steady state had been reached. Because the temper- 
ature distributions were not changing with time, simple frame 
averaging could be used to reduce the effect of noise in the time 
domain. An image suitable for further processing was created by 
taking the average of 10 TLC frames or 20 IR frames. 
Spatial averaging was used to increase confidence in the 
measured values. This involves choosing an area of the image 
and calculating the average value of its constituent pixels, but the 
area chosen has to represent an isotherm. Choosing the isother- 
mal area for the calibration apparatus was simple, because a 
copper block was used, see Figure 6a. The temperature distribu- 
tion on the rotating disc was axisymmetric, but because there 
were radial variations, it was necessary to average the tempera- 
tures as described below. 
The TLC coating was applied to the disc's surface between 
the radii r = 220 mm and r = 290 mm. The axisymmetric nature 
of the experiment allowed the colour CCD camera and infrared 
thermal imager to view just one part of this liquid-crystal ring, as 
shown in Figure 6b. Because the centre of the disc lay outside 
this field-of-view, two reference lines at r = 225 mm and r = 285 
500mm 
Figure 5 
ment coated ~urface 
/ 
',', - / "-. 4oo,..,. / 30°' • 30 ° -.. 
'~ l lamp 
General arrangement of remote sensing equip- Rotation effects on liquid crystals. B. J. Syson et al. 
(a) Field of view for calibration apparatus. 
"'" ~2 "E~''s2x----'-'~"~2"Tzi'2 
...... > 
\ / 
j centre of disc 
(b) Field of view for rotating disc. 
Figure 6 Field-of-view for thermal signal 
mm were marked on the disc. These enabled the position of the 
disc's centre (and hence the disc radius corresponding to each 
pixel in an image) to be calculated. Eight pixels of known disc 
radius (four on each reference line) were chosen from an image, 
and the disc's centre was found by minimising the sum of the 
square of the errors on these eight known radii. This regression 
was performed by software written in-house based on the nonlin- 
ear Newton-Raphson method. 
The "local" temperature was calculated from a spatial aver- 
age over a small segment of the disc. Because the temperature 
varied with radius, the radial height Ar of the segment was set to 
one millimeter. For the liquid-crystal analysis, the approximate 
angular width A0 of the segment was 0.25 radians, and the 
resulting number of pixels in the average was 5000; for the 
infrared, the equivalent values were 0.6 radians and 100 pixels. 
3.3. Calibration apparatus 
Stationary calibration of the liquid crystal was performed using 
the copper-block apparatus shown in Figure 7. It consists of a 
copper block (67 mm × 67 mm x 5 mm) mounted in poly- 
methacrylimide insulation foam (k = 0.04 W/mK). The block 
was heated electrically by a thin-film heater attached to the back 
face, and its temperature measured using a T-type thermocouple. 
The diameter of the thermocouple wires was 0.13 mm, and the 
bead was located in the centre of the block. The front face of the 
block was sprayed black prior to application of the TLC coating 
under test. 
The thickness of the coating (black paint and liquid crystal) 
was measured and found to be approximately 25 i~m. When the 
copper block was heated to 60°C (the upper limit of the R45C10W 
liquid crystal's temperature range), then, assuming a typical 
thermal conductivity of 0.2 W/mK, the temperature drop across 
Int. J. Heat and Fluid Flow, Vol. 17, No. 5, October 1996 495 

Rotation effects on liquid crystals: B. ,J. Syson et al. 
/- 67ran limide foam 
ocouple 
I coating 
Figure 7 Schematic diagram of copper-block calibration 
apparatus 
the coating due to radiative and free convective heat transfer to 
the ambient was estimated to be approximately 0.1°C. The tem- 
perature drop across the copper block itself was an order of 
magnitude smaller. 
4. Experimental measurements 
4.1. Calibration using copper-block apparatus 
The copper-block apparatus described in the Calibration appara- 
tus section was used to calibrate both the TLC coating and the IR thermal imager, employing the thermocouple as a secondary 
standard. The T-type thermocouple used in the copper block was 
one of a batch of three calibrated over the range 20 to 120°C in a 
Haake oil bath. The temperature of the silicone oil was mea- 
sured using NPL mercury-filled thermometers with a manufac- 
turer's specified accuracy of 0.025°C. The thermocouple cold 
junction, which was in an isothermal box at around 20°C, was 
measured with a platinum resistance thermometer (PRT) with a 
specified accuracy of +0.1°C at 0°C and _+0.2°C at 100°C. The 
voltages from the PRT and thermocouples were measured using 
a Solatron 3535D datalogger incorporating a digital voltmeter 
with an uncertainty of + 1 IxV. Typically, 100 voltage readings 
were taken at each temperature over increments of 5°C. The 
average thermocouple voltages were fitted to the measured tem- 
peratures using a least-squares cubic polynomial, and the maxi- 
mum difference between the fitted and measured temperature 
was 0.1°C in the range 20 to 70°C. The maximum difference 
between the calibration curve and the British Standard 4937 
(part 5) for T-type thermocouples was also 0.1°C in this range. 
The copper block was heated to the required temperature, 
measured by the thermocouple, and the power was adjusted to 
maintain the equilibrium. With the illumination, video camera, 
and IR scanner arranged as shown in Figure 5, the IR readings 
and the video recordings were made simultaneously. Tests were 
repeated at approximately I°C intervals from 45 to 58°C, and 
the results from the IR and TLC calibrations are presented in 
Table 1. 
An emissivity setting of e = 0.96 on the IR imager was found 
to give good agreement with the thermocouple measurements, as 
shown in Table 1. The difference was within 0.1°C except for two 
values where the error was 0.2°C and 0.3°C. (Surprisingly, the 
emissivity of the TLC did not appear to change even when the 
surface colours changed; the reason for this is not understood.) 
For the TLC calibration, Table 1 shows the number of pixels 
used to evaluate the hue, the average value of the hue, and the 
standard deviation for each of the measured temperatures. Fig- 
ure 8 shows the variation of the (average) hue with temperature, 
measured by the thermocouple, together with the "uncertainty" 
in the hue based on two standard deviations (2~). It should be 
pointed out that, owing to the large number of data (> 104) used 
in determining the average hue value at any temperature, the 
95% confidence interval for this average is equivalent to less 
than + 0.005°C. The "2tr uncertainty" is only meaningful when a 
single hue value is used to determine the temperature, in which 
case the uncertainty would be around _+0.4°C; in all practical 
cases, averaging over a large number of data reduces this uncer- 
tainty to a negligible quantity. 
It should be remembered that the copper block provides an 
isothermal surface which, in principle, is monochromatic. How- 
Table 1 Calibration of IR thermal imager (s= 0.96) and TLC using copper-block apparatus 
Thermocouple 
temperature, °C IR temperature, °C TLC calibration 
Number of pixels Average value Standard 
of hue deviation ~r 
47.5 47.4 42389 9.6 2.4 
48.5 48.5 49263 59.3 3.6 
49.5 49.6 36566 78.3 2.5 
50.6 50.6 33538 90.7 2.2 
51.5 51.5 39370 98.3 2.2 
52.4 52.4 46706 107.2 2.2 
53.5 53.8 51938 119.2 2.2 
55.0 55.0 50897 135.3 1.8 
56.7 56.7 36018 148.0 1.1 
58.3 58.5 19604 156.1 0.8 
496 Int. J. Heat and Fluid Flow, Vol. 17, No. 5, October 1996 

160- 
_...i. ~ ........ - .......... 140- 
120- "'*"" "'" 
80- ,/ Jr'" 
60- 
40- 
20- 
0 
47 48 49 50 511 52 513 54 55 56 57 518 59 
thcm~ocoup~ temperature ('C) 
Figure 8 Variation of TLC hue with temperature (measured 
by thermocouple) of copper block 
ever, the temperature of the rotating disc varies with radius, and 
so the complete spectrum of colours may appear in the field-of- 
view. As discussed in Section 4.2, the colour balance circuits in 
the video hardware can create a bias in the recorded colour 
adding to the uncertainty in the measurement of temperature 
using TLC. 
4.2. Temperature measurement on rotating disc 
The video camera, IR scanner, and lighting were set up as shown 
in Figure 5, and measurements were made for rotational speeds 
between 1000 and 7000 rpm in increments of 1000 rpm. For the 
coated ring on the disc, which extended for 225 < r _< 285 mm, 
these speeds gave rise to centripetal accelerations between 250 
and 15,600g, where g is the acceleration due to gravity. In case 
there were any time-dependent systematic errors, which could be 
confused with the effects of rotational speed, high-speed and 
low-speed tests were carried out alternately rather than in a 
rising or falling sequence of speeds. 
Figure 9 shows the variation of hue (obtained from the 
video-recording of the TLC as described above) with the temper- 
ature of the disc measured by the IR imager. Despite the scatter 
160- 
140- 
120- 
100- 
i 
40- 
0 
47 ..... .~.4," <:~>" 
." z- 
• " 4;" 
/Z f -- 1000 rzv/miu 
7.~ ...... 2000 ~tmia 
~ ~,~'/ --- 40~0 rev/min 
,:.',," - -- 50O0 rev/min 
,' .~., 
2, ,'9 ;o 5, 5~ ,'~ ;, ;5 ;, ;7 ,'~ ;9 temp~mne 07) 
Figure 9 Variation of TLC hue with disc temperature (mea- 
sured by IR imager) Rotation effects on liquid crystals: B. J. Syson et al. 
in the experimental results, there appear to be no obvious effects 
of rotational speed. For speeds between 1000 and 7000 rpm and 
for a fixed value of hue in the range 80 to 120, the temperature 
variation with speed may be around 0.5°C, but the temperature 
variations for the results at the extremes of 1000 and 7000 rpm 
are smaller than this. If there is an effect of rotational speed 
then it is not progressive: the effect does not increase monotoni- 
cally as the speed increases. 
Figure 10 shows the variation of the temperature measured 
by the TLC (obtained using the copper-block hue-temperature 
calibration shown in Figure 8) with the temperature of the disc 
measured by the IR imager. The calibration line, obtained from 
the copper block for a stationary frame of reference, is also 
shown in the figure. The measurements show both scatter and an 
"oscillatory bias" around the calibration line: there appears to be 
some effect of rotational speed, but the scatter is relatively small, 
and the bias is not a monotonic function of speed. 
The "oscillatory bias" was originally thought to be caused not 
by moving from a stationary to a rotating frame per se, but by 
moving from the surface of the copper block to that of the disc. 
The two surfaces could have different emissivities and reflectivi- 
ties, and this would affect the optical and IR signals in different 
ways. To test this hypothesis, an in situ calibration was per- 
formed on the disc when it was rotating at 1000 rpm. (Ideally the 
calibration should have been performed on a stationary disc, but 
this was impracticable owing to the nonaxisymmetric tempera- 
ture variations that are created on a heated vertical surface in a 
(single g) gravitational field.) For the in situ calibration, the hue 
values for the TLC were calibrated using the IR measurements 
obtained from the surface of the heated disc; the emissivity 
setting of the IR imager was kept at e = 0.96, the value used for 
the original copper-block calibration. 
Figure 11 shows the variation of the temperature measured 
by the TLC (using the in situ calibration) with the temperature 
measured by the IR imager. There is still scatter in the measure- 
ments, but the oscillatory bias has been reduced significantly. 
The departure of the measurements made at 7000 rpm from the 
calibration at 1000 rpm is typically less than 0.3°C, although the 
departure of measurements at intermediate speeds (for example, 
3000 rpm) is up to 0.5°C. While the departure from the calibra- 
59- 
58- 
57- 
56- 
55- 
~ 53- 
~ 52- 
51- 
50- 
49- 
48- 
47 
47 . f* 
• / //" 
SAY" 
IR mrap~t~t~ CO) 
Figure 10 Variation of disc temperature measured by TLC 
(using copper-block calibration) with temperature measured 
by IR imager 
Int. J. Heat and Fluid Flow, Vol. 17, No. 5, October 1996 497 

Rotation effects on liquid crystals: B. J. Syson et aL 
,7 
56- 
55- /../ ,-- //" 
,,_ 
/.(*.'/" 
51- /J I ..... 3ooo.v~. 
.c" --.--. 5000 rcvhlain 
f/'f/ 49- l~,~ l 
48 
4, ,'9 5'0 ;, 5'6 IR tempe~atu~ CC) 
Figure 11 Variation of disc temperature measured by TLC 
(using in situ calibration) with temperature measured by IR 
imager 
tion line is relatively small, and it does not increase monotoni- 
cally with speed, the effect does appear to be speed related. 
The reason for this bias is believed to lie with the colour- 
balance circuits in the video hardware (CCD camera, recorder, 
and frame grabber) used for recording the TLC signal. As stated 
above, in the copper-block calibration, the surface is isothermal, 
and only one colour is visible at any instant: the variation in the 
hue from pixel to pixel will, therefore, be relatively small. In the 
disc experiments, the surface is nonisothermal, and the variations 
in hue will be large. In principle, the radial distribution of 
temperature over the disc should have been the same for all 
tests, making any bias invariant with speed. In practice, however, 
the temperature distribution varied from test to test, and, conse- 
quently, any systematic error in the video hardware would pro- 
duce what appears to be a "speed-related bias" in the TLC 
temperature measurements. 
Figure 12 shows the radial distribution of the disc tempera- 
ture (measured by the IR imager) for the seven speeds. Although 
the distributions are similar, their magnitudes are different. The 
relationship between the maximum temperature and speed shown 
in Figure 12 is similar to that between the hue and speed shown 
in Figure 11. It would appear, therefore, that the "speed-related 
bias" in hue is caused, indirectly, by the temperature distribution 
on the disc and not by the speed per se. 
The precise mechanism by which the hue values become 
dependent on the distribution of temperature is not fully under- 
stood by the authors, but investigations have begun to ascertain 
if the problem can be solved using a digital video system rather 
than the current analog one. However, despite this relatively 
minor problem, it can be reasonably concluded that, for accelera- 
tions up to 16,000g, rotational speed has no significant effect on 
the temperature response of wide-band thermochromic liquid 
crystal. 
4.3. A comment on the "'rotational shift" 
As stated in the introduction, the principal reason for studying 
this phenomenon was to prove or disprove the "rotational shift" 
observed by other experimenters. There has been speculation 
that the TLC could be sheared by surface strain on a rotating 59= 
56- .S:,. ~ j..--- 
5~- /..< .... .- -- 
.//.~,*'. ' .~ * -- 1000 tev/nfia 
,,./// .~/ ......... 2ooo l~v/min 
.,,'. // ....~" - - - 4coo rev/min 
50- /:" " - - 50OOre~,~ 
//: ..... ~.~- -- 6000 ~,~, 
49- 
48- 
47 I I I I I I I I I I I I 
225 230 235 2AO 245 250 255 260 265 270 275 280 285 
radius (ram) 
Figure 12 Radial distribution of disc temperature measured 
by IR imager 
body or could be centrifuged by the "g forces". Because we have 
established beyond reasonable doubt that there is no "rotational 
shift," then we might be permitted to speculate on why so many 
experimenters were wrong. 
Since submitting this paper for publication in October 1995, 
we have joined forces with Cengiz Camci and Boris Glezer in the 
United States, and the two groups have produced a short paper 
on the separate experiments: theirs with narrow-band TLC and 
ours with wide-band. In that paper (Camci et al. 1996), we 
suggest a reason for the "rotational shift." For completeness 
(and in deference to one of the reviewers of this paper), we 
repeat that suggestion here. 
A thermocoupte, which will be a different material from that 
of the body in which it is embedded, will cause a local 
disturbance of the temperature distribution in the body. This 
creates a thermal-disturbance error in which there is a differ- 
ence between the true (undisturbed) temperature and the 
measured temperature. The magnitude of the error depends, 
amongst other things, on the size of the thermocouple, on the 
thermal properties of the materials, and on the local heat 
flux. 
For a rotating body at a constant temperature, the heat 
transfer coefficient, and hence the surface heat flux, increases 
as the rotational speed increases. Consequently, the thermal- 
disturbance error created by an embedded thermocouple will 
increase with rotational speed. If thermocouples and TLC are 
used to measure the temperature of a rotating body then the 
difference between the two measurements will also increase 
with speed. 
This phenomenon has been observed independently in 
experiments carried out by the two groups of authors. It is 
believed to be the reason why other research workers have 
observed what they (wrongly) believed to be the "rotational 
shift" in TLC output referred to in Section 1. 
5. Conclusions 
Wide-band TLC and an IR thermal imager have been used to 
measure the surface temperature of a rotating disc. The hue 
technique was employed to determine the temperature of the 
TLC, which had an effective range of 48 to 58°C, with a resolu- 
tion of around 0.1°C. The IR imager, which also had a resolution 
498 Int. J. Heat and Fluid Flow, Vol. 1 7, No. 5, October 1996 

of approximately 0.1°C, was used as a datum to determine the 
effect of rotational speed on the temperature response of the 
TLC. 
Tests were conducted at rotational speeds between 1000 and 
7000 rpm, corresponding to centripetal accelerations from 250 to 
16,000 g. Although there was a scatter of around 0.5°C in the 
measurements, the typical difference between the temperatures 
measured by the TLC and the IR imager at the extremes of the 
speed range (1000 and 7000 rpm) was less than 0.3°C. 
What appeared to be a small speed-related bias in the mea- 
sured temperatures was attributed to the characteristics of the 
video hardware used to measure and record the images from the 
TLC. The value of the hue obtained from the video recordings 
was found to be weakly dependent on the distribution of temper- 
ature on the rotating disc. Despite this equipment-related bias, it 
is concluded that, for accelerations up to 16000 g and within the 
uncertainty of the measurements, there is no significant effect of 
rotational speed on the temperature response of wide-band TLC. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors wish to thank the UK Engineering and Physical 
Sciences Research Council, the Defence Research Agency and 
European Gas Turbines Ltd for supporting the research de- 
scribed in this paper. Rotation effects on liquid crystals: B. J. Syson et al. 
References 
Camci, C. and Glezer, B. 1995. Private communication 
Camci, C., Glezer, B., Owen, J. M., Pilbrow, R. G. and Syson, B. J. 
1996. Application of thermochromic liquid crystal to rotating 
surfaces. Paper 96-GT-138 ASME International Gas Turbine and 
Aeroengine Congress, Birmingham, UK, June 10-13, 1996 
Camci, C., Kim, K. and Hippensteele, S. A. 1992. A new hue captur- 
ing technique for the quantitative interpretation of liquid-crystal 
images used in convective heat-transfer studies. J. Turbomachin- 
ery, 114, 765-775 
Jones, T. V. and Hippensteele, S. A. 1988. High-resolution heat- 
transfer-coefficient maps applicable to compound-curve surfaces 
using liquid crystals in a transient wind tunnel. NASA TM 89855 
Metzger, D. E., Bunker, R. S. and Bosch G. 1991. Transient liquid- 
crystal measurement of local heat-transfer on a rotating-disk with 
jet impingement. J. Turbomachinery, 113, 52-59 
Wang, Z., Ireland, P. T. and Jones, T. V. 1995. An advanced method 
of processing liquid-crystal video signals from transient heat- 
transfer experiments. J. Turbomachinery, 117, 184-189 
Wilson, M., Pilbrow, R. and Owen, J. M. 1995. Flow and heat transfer 
in pre-swirl rotor-stator system. Paper 95-GT-239. ASME Interna- 
tional Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress, Houston, TX, June 
5-8, 1995 
Wilson, M., Syson, B. J. and Owen, J. M. 1993. Image processing 
techniques applied to wide-band thermochromic liquid crystals. 
Proc. Eurotherm 32: Heat Transfer in Single Phase Flows, Oxford, 
UK, July 1993 
Int, J. Heat and Fluid Flow, Vol. 17, No. 5, October 1996 499 

