CQa .__ __ B Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B 116 ( 1996) 257-26 1 
Angu lar distribution and expansion of laser ablation plumes measl 
by fast intensified charge coupled device photographs NIOM B Beam Interactions 
with Materials 8 Atoms 
lred 
A. Mele &*, A. Giardini Guidoni a, R. Kelly b, A. Miotello b, S. Orlando ‘, 
R. Teghil d, C. Fhrnini a 
a Dipartimento di Chimica, Vniversit& di Roma “La Sapienza”, Piauale A. More, 5-00185 Rome, Italy 
b Dipartimento di Fisica, Vniversith di Trento, Povo (TN), Italy 
’ Istituto Materiali Speciali, CNR, Tito Scala (PZ), Italy 
’ Dipartimento di Chimica, Vniversit& &Na Basilicata, Potenza. Italy 
Abstract 
Laser ablation plumes produced from various targets including metals, semiconductors, and superconductors have been 
photographed in real time with a gated, intensified charge coupled device (CCD) camera system. The expansion rates of the 
three-dimensional images have been measured in a wide range of delay times after the laser pulse by varying the beam 
parameters such as spot size, spot shape, and fluence. The analysis of the observed plumes leads to the angular distribution 
of the ablated material which is strongly related to the process of film growth by pulsed laser deposition. 
1. Introduction 
Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) has been increasingly 
applied to the preparation of thin films and coatings of a 
large number of materials. Laser ablation of a solid pro- 
duces a plume (often but not always a plasma plume) 
which travels from the target to the substrate expanding 
along three perpendicular axes. In situ characterization of 
the plume as it moves and of the angular spread is very 
important in order to control thin film properties such as 
uniformity, morphology, and composition [l]. During PLD 
a background gas such as 0, or N, may be added to 
supplement a loss or to aid incorporation in the growing 
film. It is known, both from gas dynamics [2] and experi- 
ment [3], that plume expansion has a different trend in 
vacuum than in the presence of background gas. Moreover, 
angular profiles of film thickness and composition (i.e. 
stoichiometry) may be altered if a multicomponent target 
is being ablated [4]. The overall process has been inter- 
preted in terms of Knudsen layer formation very close to 
the target surface, followed by an unsteady adiabatic ex- 
pansion [5,6]. 
Several experimental methods have been used to mea- 
sure the plume angular distribution. These are classified as 
film-based or probe-based [I]. The probe-methods analyze 
* Corresponding author. Fax +39 6 490324, Tel. -I- 39 6 
49913307. the high resolution optical emission or absorption of the 
laser plume. Ion probes have also been utilized to probe 
the expanding plume [7]. The film-based methods depend 
on determining ex situ the thickness profile of the de- 
posited thin film. The present work deals with a direct 
method of probing the expanding plume by a three-dimen- 
sional fast photographic technique. The method is useful 
for studying plume dynamics during in situ pulsed laser 
deposition of a wide variety of materials: metals, semicon- 
ductors, and high T, superconductors. The effect of the 
laser parameters (spot size, spot shape, and fluence) has 
been investigated by observing temporally and spatially 
the expanding plume. 
2. Experimental 
Laser ablation was carried out in a high vacuum cham- 
ber equipped with several view ports [3]. Vacuum operat- 
ing conditions were better than 1O-3 Pa. A rotating target 
(8 rpm) was irradiated at normal incidence either by an 
excimer laser (A = 248 nm, r= 18 ns, fluence 3-12 
J/cm’, rectangular spot size 0.5-2.4 mm by 1.0 mm) or 
by a NQYAG laser (A = 532 nm, r = 6 ns, fluence 3-6 
J/cm2, circular spot size 0.7 mm’). The larger dimension 
of the rectangular spot could be reduced by inserting a slit 
between the laser and the target. Independently of this, the 
fluence could be varied by tilting a coated fused silica 
plate through which the beam passed. A gated intensified 
0168-583X/%/$15.00 Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
PII SO168-583X(96)00056-0 
258 A. Mele et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B II6 (1996) 257-261 
charge coupled device (CCD) camera (EG & G Model 
1530-PUV+ LCI-I, 512X 512 pixels, 18 bits dynamic 
range) with spatial and temporal resolution of 1.50 pm and 
5 ns was used to acquire the plume images for a single 
shot. Orthogonal lateral views of the plume expansion 
were made by recording the overall visible emission (400- 
800 nm). A 50 mm Nikkor lens could observe the plume 
expansion over a 6 cm region starting at the target. The 
plasma emission intensity of the intensified CCD pho- 
tographs was plotted in terms of 10% step contours. The 
targets were Cu disks, Sn disks, as well as 
Pbe,,Bi,,,Sr,Ca,Cu,O. (PbBSCCO) and SnSe pellets 
which were made from pressed powders. 
3. Results and discussion 
The expansion of the plasma plumes obtained by irradi- 
ating with the rectangular beam of the excimer laser was 
measured from the intensified CCD photographs. The 
plumes were analyzed in three dimensions by lateral views 
in both the xz and yz planes. z is the axis normal ,to the 
target, whereas x is normally the larger and y is normally 
the smaller dimension of the laser spot (Fig. 1). The 
plumes were found to have an ellipsoidal shape with three 
distinct axes. As in previous.work [8] the lateral expan- 
sions (x and y) were found to be “rotated” by 90“ with 
respect to the laser spot (Fig. 1). We hasten to add, 
however, that the “rotation” was not a formal rotation in 
which the plume passed continuously from one orientation 
to the other but rather a situation in which (referring to 
Fig. 1) the transport of particles was more effective in the 
y than in the x direction. This has been confirmed by 
numerical solution of the gas-dynamic equations in two 
dimensions [8,9] where we find an unrotated situation at 
very short times but a well defined symmetry change at 
longer times. Tentatively, the effect can be explained in 
terms of the directionality of the flow such that transport 
normal to a side is favored over transport from region near 
a comer because it is less divergent. The effect has been 
confirmed for square, rectangular, and triangular laser 
spots [9,10]. 
The materials examined, namely Cu, Sn, SnSe and 
PbBSCCO, have all shown very similar behaviour. A 
typical example is shown in Fig. 2 for plumes generated 
from Cu and PbBSCCO targets at 600 ns delay time 
viewed from two lateral axes at 90” with respect to the 
laser spot as in Fig. 1. It can be seen that both plumes have 
an ellipsoidal shape, that for Cu having dimensions x = 5 
mm, y = 12 mm, Z= 12 mm and that for PbBSCCO 
having dimensions x = 12 mm, y = 17 mm, z = 21 mm. 
A correlation between the laser spot shape and the lateral 
spread of the luminous material is indicated. According to 
the gas-dynamics calculations [S,9] the role of the spot 
shape in affecting the shape of the plume begins in the 
period immediately after particle release when the lateral expansion is relatively slight. This was also confirmed 
experimentally from photographs at very short delay times 
when the plume was close to the target (50-60 ns). The 
shape changes would, by necessity, cease when the parti- 
cles no longer interacted according to gas-dynamics but 
went into free flight. We have assumed that the light 
emitting particles in the plume are representative of all 
materials ejected, i.e. that the emitting and non-emitting 
states have similar velocities. 
A detailed analysis of the effect of spot size on the 
plume generated from Cu is shown in Fig. 3. A set of three 
density contours, obtained by varying one dimension of the 
rectangular spot and maintaining the other fixed, always at 
the same fluence (12 J/cm2), is shown. The contours of 
these frames depict the change of the plume viewed in the 
xz. plane, i.e. the plane corresponding to the reduced 
dimension of the spot (Fig. 1). The plume shape viewed in 
the yz plane, i.e. the plane corresponding to the unreduced 
dimension y = 1 mm, remained the same (12 + 1 mm). 
From this sequence it may be observed that by reducing 
the larger dimension from 2.0 to 0.5 mm the lateral spread 
increases. These data confirm previous findings that film 
thickness profiles become less forward peaked as the spot 
dimension diminishes [4]. 
Results for Cu of the type seen in Fig. 3 are plotted in 
Fig. 4a in terms of the parameter p of the angular distribu- 
tion fl f3) a cos pl.?, which is a reasonable approximation to 
describe the plume shape in three-dimensional space [l]. In 
this case 0 is measured on the 10% intensity contour. The 
plot shows the trend of p when the large (x) dimension of 
the rectangular laser beam is diminished from 2.4 to 0.5 at 
the same fluence of 12 J/cm’. The data fit a linear plot 
with the tendency to a value of 0 5 p I 1 for small spot 
sizes. It should be noted that for different time delays from 
the laser pulse and thus for various distances from the 
target, the plumes have similar values of p, i.e. the shape 
I /-\ / EXPANDING 
PLUME \ 
Fig. 1. Solid: sketch showing the lateral (xy) axes of a rectangular 
1ase.r spot appropriate to a laser pulse directed at normal incidence 
towards a target. Dashed: approximate xy symmetry of the ex- 
panding plume, showing that the larger side of the spot becomes 
the smaller side of the plume. 
A. Mele et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 116 (1996) 257-261 259 
is conserved. The effect of laser fluence on the angular 
distribution in the xz plane of the plume generated from 
Cu is reported in Fig. 4b. A marked decrease of p from 9 
to 5 as a result of varying the fluence from 12 to 6 J/cm2 
is found. Similar behaviour is observed also for a SnSe 
target. This interesting result indicates that the plume has a 
tendency to become symmetrical along the three axes 
x, y, z when the fluence of the laser beam is decreased 
(p = 1). At the same time the lateral spread increases. A 
broadened distribution is typical at low fluence also for 
other systems [ 1,7]. 
Experiments with a circular beam from a Nd-YAG 
laser (532 nm) show that, at a laser fluence of 12 J/cm’, 
the plume expansion is ellipsoidal and symmetrical in the 
xz and yz planes with the axes z > x = y. This could be 
expected from the geometry of the spot. The same evolu- 
tion of plume shape found for a rectangular spot as a function of fluence is observed. Thus, the plume tends to 
become symmetrical along the three axes x, y, z when 
the fluence of the laser beam is decreased. The nearly 
spherical shape of the plume with both a rectangular and a 
spherical spot suggests an effusive regime corresponding 
to a removal of material by normal vaporization (as dis- 
tinct from explosive boiling [11,12]). This suggests that 
within distances where the substrate is usually located, that 
is about 20-30 mm, the angular distribution will be inde- 
pendent of distance. The analysis of the plume evolution of 
all materials studied, namely Cu, Sn, SnSe, and PbB- 
SCCO, has confirmed this result. 
It is apparent from the contours of the rectangular spot 
of Fig. 3 and from the circular spot (to be published) that 
the spot size and shape of the laser beam have a marked 
effect on the plume symmetry. This effect is very general 
for all materials and persists at long distances from the 
Fig. 2. Overall emission from Cu ((a) and (b)) and PbBSCCO (cc) and (d>) targets laser-irradiated at 248 mn. The light intensity is shown in 
terms of two-dimensional 10% density contours (smoothened). The maxima are indicated in (b) to (d) as a solid circle. Details: delay time 
600 ns, exposure time 100 ns, fluence 12 J/cm*, rectangular laser spot (2.4 X 1 mm*). The views, as indicated in each case, are either in 
the xz or the yz plane of the spot. Grid step: 2 mm. 
260 A. Mele et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 116 (1996) 257-261 
TARGET 1 (4 
600 ns 
TARGET I(b)] 
1 TARGET 1 
Fig. 3. Set of three 10% density contours (smoothened) from 
photographs of a Cu disk laser-irradiated at 248 nm. Details: delay 
time 600 ns, exposure time 100 ns, fluence 12 J/cm’. The 
rectangular laser spot dimensions are 2.0X 1.0 mm* (a), 1.0X 1.0 
mm* (b), 0.5 X 1.0 mm* (cl. The views are in the w plane of the 
spot. Grid step: 2 mm. target. A closer examination of the results of the present 
investigation shows an additional effect which is due to the 
energy distribution within the laser spot. It is known from 
the profiles of the energy maps, either of an excimer laser 
with a rectangular beam or of a Nd-YAG laser with a 
circular beam, that the energy for both is higher in the 
middle than in the periphery of the beam. This has the 
effect of a non-uniform removal of material from the 
target. This view is supported from a comparison of the 
plume contours obtained by a square spot from an excimer 
laser beam by reducing the larger lateral dimension down 
to that of the smaller one. A homogeneous distribution of 
the energy on both sides would provide an identical plume 
symmetry as observed for a circular spot [13]. However, 
this is not the case for the excimer laser because the 
unreduced small dimension side has kept the energy distri- 
101 I I 1 
x DIMENSION OF LASER SPOT (mm) 
10 I L , 
hv(248nm)--Cu 
I I L J 
6 8 10 12 
ENERGY FLUENCE (J/cm*) 
Fig. 4. Angular distribution in terms of cos@ from data for a 
laser-irradiated Cu disk as in Fig. 3. (a) Plot of p versus a varying 
laser spot dimension (x). the other dimension remaining fixed at 
1.0 mm. (b) Plot of p versus fluence. In the case of(b) the spot 
dimensions are 2.4X 1.0 mm*. The views are in the xz plane of 
the spot for both (a) and (b). 
A. Mele et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 116 (1996) 257-261 261 
.z 600 ns 
1 TARGET ( I600 ns 1 
TARGET i(b)I 
Fig. 5. Set of two-dimensional 10% density contours (smoothened) from photographs of a Cu disk laser-irradiated at 
are indicated as a solid circle. Details: delay time 600 ns, exposure time 100 ns, fluence 12 J/cm*, square laser spot 
views, as indicated in each case, are either in the xz or the yz plane of the spot. Grid step: 2 mm. 248 nm. The maxima 
(0.8 X 0.8 mm2). The 
bution whereas the other side acquires a more homoge- 
neous distribution when the original dimension is reduced. 
The latter distribution produces the plume of Fig. 5a in the 
ZJ plane, the unchanged side that of Fig. 5b in the zy 
plane. 
The angular distribution of the expanding plume is a 
direct measurement of the particles velocities in a three-di- 
mensional space. From the results of Figs. 2 and 3 it 
appears that the highest velocity is normal to the target and 
that the lowest velocities are for lateral expansion. Various 
factors may lead to such behaviour. For example, it may 
be the result of complex phenomena occurring by the 
interaction of the laser beam with a solid surface, such that 
a number of layers of the material are ejected and a 
pressure profile develops at the interface which character- 
izes the flow of material. This would be especially true at 
higher fluences when explosive rather than normal vapor- 
ization can be expected [11,12]. The expansion n&ma1 and 
parallel to the target evidently acquires different pressure 
gradients [ 13,141. The highest gradient is expected to be 
along the target normal (z axis) and the lowest gradients 
along the x and y axes. The gradients themselves are in 
turn effected by the size and shape of the laser beam. 
Finally we note that conditions of normal vaporization 
lead to low particle densities and the distributions are 
characterized by low powers of cos 6. The flow of the 
particles under conditions of explosive boiling is character- 
ized by high number densities. The flow conditions are 
then characterized by a Knudsen layer, where the distribu- 
tion is discontinuous [ 11,121. This boundary layer is fol- 
lowed fist by an unsteady adiabatic expansion and finally 
by free flight. Depending on the persistance of adiabatic expansion phase, the angular distributions show strong 
forward peaking of the type cos% with p >> 1. 
References 
[I] K.L. Saenger, in Pulsed Laser Deposition of Thin Films 
(than. 71, eds. D.B. Chrisev and G.K. Hubler (Wiley, New 
01 
[31 
[41 
151 
t61 
[iI 
k4 
191 
1101 
illI 
[I21 
[I31 
[I41 York, 1994) p. 199. - 
R. Kelly, A. Miotello, B. Braren, A. Gupta and K. Casey, 
Nucl. Instr. and Meth B 65 (1992) 187. 
T. Di Palma, S. Orlando, A. Giardini Guidoni, A.J. Paul, 
J.W. Hastie and A. Mele, Appl. Surf. Sci. 86 (1995) 68. 
R,E. Muenchausen, K.M. Hubbard, S. Foltyn, R.G. Esteer, 
N.S. Nogar and C. Jenkins, Appl. Phys. Lett. 56 (1990) 578. 
R. Kelly and R.W. Dreyfus, Surf. Sci. 198 (1988) 263. 
R. Kelly and A. Miotello, Appl. Phys. B 57 (1993) 145. 
D.B. Geohegan, in: Pulsed Laser Deposition of Thin Films 
(chap. 51, eds. D.B. Chrisey and G.K. Hubler (Wiley, New 
York, 1994) p. 115. 
A. Mele, A. Giardmi, R. Kelly, A. Miotello, S. Orlando and 
R. Teghil, Appl. Surf. Sci. 96-98 (1996) 102. 
A. Miotello and R. Kelly, Appl. Phys. Lett. 61 (1992) 2784. 
R. Kelly and A. Miotello, Nucl. Jnstr. and Meth. B 91 (1994) 
682. 
R. Kelly and A. Miotello, Appl. Surf. Sci. 96-98 (1996) 205. 
R. Kelly, A. Miotello, A. Mele, A. Giardini Guidoni, J.W. 
Hastie, P.K. Schenck and H. Okabe, Surf. Sci. (submitted). 
R.W. Ohse, J.F. Bebelot, A. Frezzotti, K.A. Long and J. 
Magill, High Temp. High Press. 2 (1980) 537. 
N.F. Ramsey, Molecular Beams (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 
1956). 
