Pergamon Vacuum/volume 47Jnumbers 6-8/pages 985 to 99011996 
Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved 
PII: SOO42-207X(96300106-X 0042-207X/96 $15.00+.00 
Hydrogen isotope analysis of thick layers deposited in 
tokamaks 
J P Goad,” B G Skorodumov,b V G Ulano@ and C H Wu,” “JETJoint Undertaking, Abingdon, Oxon 0X14 3EA, 
UK, *Institute of Nuclear Physics, Academy of Science of Uzbekistan, 702132 Tashkent, Uzbekistan, “The NET 
Team, Max-Planck-lnstitut fuer Plasmaph ysik, D-85748 Garching, Germany 
Predictions can be made for the tritium retention in future tokamaks such as ITER, based on the analyses of 
the D retention in redeposited films in existing tokamaks. However, a/though amounts of H+D up to the 
saturation level are frequently observed, measurement is invariably by Ion Beam methods such as NRA and 
ERDA which only analyse to a depth in the region of a micron, whilst it is only the total content of very thick 
layers that is of relevance to ITER. This article compares these near-surface data with methods developed to 
determine the composition throughout thick C-H films (- 100 microns) such as Neutron-induced Elastic Recoil 
Detection Analysis (n-ERDA) and SIMS and Nuclear Microprobe analysis of specially prepared cross-sections. 
Copyright 0 7996 Elsevier Science Ltd. 
Key words: Analysis, hydrogen retention, thick films, tokamaks. 
Introduction 
The primary mechanism for hydrogen retention in large tok- 
amaks is codeposition with (and/or implantation into) material 
eroded from areas of plasma-facing components (PFC) with high 
incident fluxes and redeposited in regions of lower fluxes. If the 
PFCs are made of carbon in the form of graphite the saturation 
level of H-isotope trapping in redeposited layers at <27OC has 
been shown to be given by H:Cr0.4: I.’ In a long pulse, high 
power machine such as the planned International Thermonuclear 
Experimental Reactor (ITER) redeposited films up to millimetres 
in thickness may accumulate at the deposition-dominated wall 
areas. If the machine is fuelled by a 50% deuterium (D)/50% 
tritium (T) mixture, then T may be trapped at up to 0.2 times the 
amount of C in these thick layers, and retention of this magnitude 
would be unacceptable both from radioactivity and cost con- 
siderations. 
In the post-mortem analysis of PFCs from JET and other 
tokamaks. similar amounts of H and D are generally observed 
in the near-surface region: since JET is normally fuelled with D 
the reason for the prevalence of H is unclear.’ However. as a 
result a saturation level of H-isotopes in the near-surface region 
may correspond to an analysed retention of D of about 0.2 times 
the amount of C, and D at this level has frequently been observed 
in surveys of the PFCs in JET.‘.4 Most of these measurements have 
been made using the Ion Beam Analysis (IBA) variant Nuclear 
Reaction Analysis (NRA), and with this technique usually only 
the outermost I micron (approximately) of the surface is 
analysed. Redeposited layers up to 130 microns thick have been 
measured in JET by sectioning the films on the flanks of the discrete limiters used until 1986,5 and it is clearly important 
for the retained D inventory to know whether or not the D 
concentration throughout the film is the same as that seen by 
NRA in the outermost micron. A Secondary Ion Mass Spec- 
troscopy (SIMS) profile was made at a different point on the 
limiter where the film was 24 microns thick which showed that 
the D (and H) concentrations appeared to start high at the 
surface, but then fell by about an order of magnitude within the 
bulk of the film.’ However, the SIMS technique, which consists 
of sputtering material from a surface using an ion gun and ana- 
lysing the ion content of the sputtered material entering a mass 
spectrometer, cannot be considered to be quantitative except in 
certain well-defined situations. Firstly the sputtering yield for an 
impurity element in a surface can vary over orders of magnitude 
depending on the surface roughness, the composition of the sub- 
strate and the binding configuration of the impurity. Secondly 
the fraction of material sputtered as ions and detected by the 
spectrometer varies by many orders of magnitude for different 
elements, and thirdly the composition profiles into the surface 
can be severely distorted due to differential sputtering. knock-on 
and shadowing effects. 
Thus JET data (which give a similar picture for H-isotope 
retention to other tokamaks) generally show high surface ( -- I 
micron) concentrations of retained H and D, and provide an 
example of lower concentrations into the bulk of a thick rede- 
posited film. This article describes the assessment of techniques 
for determining the H-isotope content of thick (> IO micron) 
films and their application to the analysis of the same thick 
redeposited films from the 1986 JET limiters 
985 
J P Coad ef a/: Hydrogen isotope analysis 
Experimental results 
Preparation of samples. The ideal situation would be to be able 
to make an analysis in situ, or at least on a complete component 
after removal from the tokamak. However, since the limiter tiles 
removed from JET after the 1986 operations were each 
450 x 120 x 77 mm, the only technique able to analyse a complete 
tile was IBA using a large target chamber specially constructed 
for analysing JET components. In order to investigate other 
methods it was therefore necessary to prepare smaller samples: 
samples were cut from the flanks of one of the limiter tiles as 
shown in Figure 1. Samples cut from the same part of the profile 
of the tile (e.g. samples 3, 8 and 11) are assumed to be equivalent. 
Since the films are very thick, it is possible to profile through the 
film by analysing a cross-section of the film, if the spatial res- 
olution of the technique is good enough, and this can be enhanced 
by producing a taper section which improves the resolution by 
up to an order of magnitude by increasing the apparent thickness 
of the film. Thus it can be seen that sections were prepared from 
samples cut adjacent to the conventional coupons. However it 
should be noted that preparation of sections may affect the results 
obtained subsequently by smearing material across the surface 
or leaching out certain components by reaction with the potting 
resin or polishing solution. (A possible method of preparing a 
section through a thick film without metallographic polishing is 
ion beam slope cutting.6.7 The area to be analysed is the side wall 
of a crater formed by ion bombardment, the line of the wall being 
defined by a sharp-edged screen. However development of the 
technique from films a few microns thick’ to films of the order of 
100 microns has yet to be demonstrated.) 
NRA analyses of tile samples and an implanted standard. The 
samples cut from the JET limiter tile were analysed by NRA to 
obtain the surface (- 1 micron) concentration of D using the 
D(3He,p)4He reaction. The results are given in the first column 
of Table 1. To check the quantification some graphite samples 
were also implanted to saturation with 5 keV deuterons over a 5 
mm diameter region, which according to TRIM calculations 
should provide a surface containing 6.10” deuterium atoms cm-’ 
Last closed flux surface Table 1. Comparison of the analyses (all in units of 10” atoms cm-‘) of 
H-isotopes in carbon samples by different techniques 
NERD 
Outer micron Total in Film 
Sample Number NRA HIERD H D H D 
1 or6 4.7 
2or7 5.4 19 6.2 
3 or 8 5.0 3.0 12 8.0 
4 or 9 4.8 1.0 2.7 65 8.5 
5or 10 2.6 87 5.3 
D-standard 2 5.1(5.3) b/g 7.5 
within the outermost 0.15 microns. One of these standards 
analysed by NRA and by other techniques is included in Table I 
and the NRA result (which was duplicated in different lab- 
oratories) is shown to be in good agreement with the calculations. 
Heavy ion induced elastic recoil detection analysis. Another of the 
IBA family is Elastic Recoil Detection Analysis (ERDA) wherein 
an ion beam is incident at glancing angle and atoms may be 
ejected from the surface after an elastic collision with the incident 
ion (that is, most of the incident energy is transferred to a recoil 
in the collision). The detector for the ejected particles is placed 
at glancing angle in the forward direction. In the most common 
form of this technique a helium ion beam is employed at energies 
up to 3 MeV. Each of the H isotopes can be analysed separately 
by this method, and the depth of analysis is about 1 micron. The 
technique is much more dependent on surface roughness than 
NRA, but is usually the only way to obtain an idea of the H (i.e. 
protium) surface concentration. However, if the incident energies 
employed are increased the depth which can be analysed also 
increases, and if ions of a heavier element are used the range of 
masses detected is also increased: this is the technique known as 
Heavy Ion ERDA.8.9 Ejected ions are detected using ionisation 
/ Top view of tile , I 
“b/ Side view of tile 
Figure 1. A diagram showing the original locations of the samples cut from a JET limiter tile used in this study. and the position of the tile relative 
to the JET plasma. 
986 
J P Goad et al: Hydrogen isotope analysis 
chambers wherein an ion from the sample passes through the 
chambers in series. The maximum value of the energy loss dE/dx, 
i.e. the Bragg peak height, of the detected particles in the detector 
gas depends on their atomic charge number Z. By suitable adjust- 
ment of the detectors, the atomic number and energy of each 
ion can be measured simultaneously. From the number of ions 
detected as a function of energy, for each element in the energy 
loss vs energy plots, can be calculated the depth distribution of 
that element into the surface. 
Figure 2 shows depth distributions for the masses 1, 2, 12 and 
16 (H, D. C and 0: respectively) through the outermost 2 microns 
of the surface of sample 8 from the I986 JET limiter tile. Profiles 
can be derived to about 10 microns for the H isotopes under 
these Heavy Ion ERDA conditions, but it can be seen in Figure 
2 that the H, D and 0 are mostly restricted to the outermost ‘,/? 
micron of the surface. Note. however, that the H continues at 
- 20% of its peak value beyond 2 microns, whereas the D con- 
centration falls to zero. Integrating under the D depth profile 
and using a surface density for graphite of 10” atoms cm‘? gives 
a concentration of 3.10” D atoms cm-’ on sample 8. As seen in 
Table 1 this is lower than the NRA value, but factors of two 
between these methods have been seen previously” and may be 
caused by a difference in the calibration of the Heavy Ion ERDA 
technique. 
Neutron-induced elastic recoil detection analysis (n-ERDA). 
ERDA with primary ions can be seen from the previous section 
to be potentially very powerful, but the depth attainable is limited 
by the need to use glancing angles (to approach the forward 
scattering conditions necessary for maximum momentum con- 
servation, and which also imposes severe practical limitations on 
the sample) and by the penetration of the primary beam. These 
limitations are eased if neutrons incident on the rear of the sample 
are the primary source. Fast neutrons will pass through samples 
a few millimetres thick without significant energy loss or attenu- 
ation, and the maximum escape depth for the recoil particles (i.e. 
normal to the surface) can be utilised.” For graphite samples 
total H isotope concentrations can be absolutely determined from 
comparison with TiH, x7 and TiD, 97 standard samples for films 
6 2.0 
1.5 
90 0.5 
0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 
Distance into surface (microns) 
Figure 2. Depth distributions for masses 1, 2, 12 and 16 (H, D, C and 0. 
respectively) determined by Heavy Ion ERDA in sample 8. 300-400 microns thick using 14 MeV neutrons, with variations 
in concentration with depth visible with a resolution for D analy- 
sis of k 30 microns: using 2.5 MeV neutrons these figures become 
-50 and -5 microns, respectively. In these experiments a 14 
MeV neutron source was employed. and a three detector tele- 
scope using silicon sensors was used to simultaneously measure 
energy loss and energy for each particle. One disadvantage of the 
method is that the neutron flux at the sample obtainable from an 
accelerator used as a neutron generator is much lower than the 
ion flux that can be achieved, so counting times are much longer 
(typically about an hour) for reasonable statistics and the absoI- 
ute sensitivity of the technique is also lower than for the ion beam 
techniques. 
The total amounts of H and D present throughout the thick- 
ness of the films (since they are well within the detection range 
for 14 MeV neutrons) are listed in the right-hand columns of 
Table 1. It can be seen that according to n-ERDA the total 
amounts of D in films up to 120 microns thick are not much 
greater than those detected in the outermost micron by NRA, 
although there was good agreement in the analysis of the D 
standard. n-ERDA also showed larger quantities of H than D in 
the films. In order to shed light on these somewhat surprising 
results, the data were deconvoluted to provide depth profiles 
through the thickest film (sample 4), and these experimental 
profiles were compared with profiles simulated by Monte Carlo 
methods for a number of distribution scenarios. The results for 
D are shown in Figure 3. It can be seen in the figure that the data 
are a good match to a distribution with 33% of the D at the 
surface and the remainder tailing in approximately 70 microns 
into the film, but clearly do not match the other model dis- 
tributions in the figure. Likewise Figure 4 shows the experimental 
Assumed depth profiles Energy spectra 
” ‘D 
4 
4 
” l.O- 3 100% of total x2=1 3 
S 
s content in 1 pm 
‘Z 
F 
E 
d 
S 0 
0 
l.O- 33% of total 
content in 1 pm 
80 40 0 
Depth, pm Energy, MeV 
Figure 3. The n-ERDA spectrum for D From sample 4 compared with 
the calculated spectrum expected for each of three different D depth 
distributions in the film 
987 
J P Coad et al: Hydrogen isotope analysis 
1 .ok 33% of total I 
1 content in 1 Km 
7 
Depth, pm Energy, MeV 
Figure 4. The n-ERDA spectrum for H from sample 4 compared with 
the calculated spectrum expected for each of three different H depth 
distributions in the film. 
profile for H, and in this case there is a good match with a 
distribution with a constant level for 70 microns from the surface 
followed by a concentration decreasing from half that value to 
zero over the next 50 microns. 
The distributions in Figure 3 and Figure 4 are merely indicative 
and in reality there may be a wealth of fine structure, since the 
inherent resolution of the n-ERDA technique is rather poor. 
However, uniform concentrations of either H or D throughout 
the film are precluded, and there is a genuine difference between 
the distributions of the two isotopes: much more detailed infor- 
mation on the distribution in the outer part of the film would be 
obtained using 2.5 MeV neutrons. Assuming the best-fit profiles 
to be correct, the H and D contents of the outermost 1 micron 
would be 1. lOI and 2.7 x 10” atoms cme2, respectively. 
Thus the n-ERDA data suggest the D is concentrated at the 
surface, and are not inconsistent with the NRA results, ahhough 
the expected amount in the outermost micron is about half the 
NRA amount (as was the Heavy Ion ERDA result). Note also 
that the H content of the outermost micron is about one-third of 
the D content (as indeed was shown by Heavy Ion ERDA on the 
adjacent sample), so that a more surface specific technique would 
suggest there is more D than H in the film, whereas in fact there 
is almost an order of magnitude less. 
Nuclear microprobe analysis of sections. The Nuckar Microprobe 
produces a focussed ion beam with a minimum diameter of about 
5 microns. Thus in principle it is possible to produce NRA profiles 
through a thick film with a resolution of about 5 microns by 
analysing a section through the film in a Nuclear Microprobe. 
Indeed, this resolution can be improved to about 1 micron by 
producing a taper section through the film. At the maximum 
resolution the beam current becomes too low for analysis in a 
reasonable time, but since the film extends uniformly in one 
direction (supposedly) the beam can be extended parallel to the film surface without degrading depth resolution. In this inves- 
tigation the bombarded area was thus oblong, 15 microns wide 
(which is thus the resolution across the section) and 100 microns 
long, allowing good statistics in about 60 s. Figure 5 shows a 
plot of D peak intensity (in arbitrary units) vs distance across the 
redeposited film section. This section was a taper section of a 60 
micron thick film polished at 5” to the surface of the sample: 
the film appears 240 microns across, so the tapering improves 
resolution by a factor of 4. (The factor of 11 that might be 
expected geometrically does not appear to be realised.) The 
sample was taken from a different part of the 1986 limiter, 
though from a similar section of tile to that shown in Figure 1. 
The Nuclear Microprobe analysis shows a peak of D at the 
surface, the width of which is approximately equal to the beam 
width, so the actual width of the D-rich layer in this taper section 
must be < I5 microns, and therefore in normal section must be 
of the order of a micron or less. Integrating under the surface 
peak and under the rest of the depth distribution suggests about 
half of the D is in the surface peak, a result similar to the n- 
ERDA analysis of another area of film. 
SIMS profiling and analysis of sections. As mentioned in the 
Introduction, a SIMS analysis of a similar limiter tile from 1986 
showed lower H and D levels within than at the surface,’ but 
there are many possible errors associated with the measurement. 
However, many of the errors associated with sputter profiling 
disappear if SIMS is used to image the cross-section, as signal 
intensities from all points in the section should be directly com- 
parable. Furthermore, since the primary ion beam used can be 
focussed to < 1 micron the potential resolution makes the tech- 
nique complementary to the Nuclear Microprobe. A number of 
sections, including sample 12, from limiter tiles were examined 
by SIMS, but the results were disappointing. When the whole 
cross-section was viewed good secondary electron images were 
obtained, and ions of impurity elements such as Cr and Ni could 
be mapped. However the D and H distributions were distorted 
and could not be used to compare the quantities of each isotope 
1600 
l 
ul 
E 
z 
: 800 Redeposited film 
Graphite 
t+ 
Distance (microns) 
Figure 5. The D peak intensity vs distance across the taper section 
redeposited film obtained by NRA using a Nuclear Microprobe. ofa 
J P Goad et al: Hydrogen isotope analysis 
across the film. It was possible to see that there was generally 
an aggregation of H and D at the surface, and occasionally 
accumulations at defects within the film or at the film/substrate 
interface. It was also clear that on the micron scale the com- 
position parallel to the surface, as well as through the film, was 
variable. 
Conventional SIMS was performed (i.e. by bombarding the 
outer surface) on samples l-5 and the D standard. Figure 6 shows 
the signal intensities in the mass peaks 1, 2 and 12 (H, D and 
C, respectively) vs bombardment time for the D standard. The 
maximum D signal level is about a factor of 7 lower than the C 
signal, so this should correspond to the saturation ratio for D:C 
of 0.4: 1.’ The D level falls off after - 300 sets, which according 
to TRIM code predictions should correspond to a depth of - 150 
nm. Figure 7 shows a similar spectrum recorded from the tile 
sample 4. Again the maximum D signal is about a factor of 7 
lower than the C signal, so since the matrix is again essentially 
carbon, this should also indicate the saturation level for D in C. 
Note, however, that this is only for < 100 s at the start of the 
profiling. The beam current density was about twice that used in 
Figure 6 (hence the C signal is lo4 rather than 4. IO’) so the amount 
sputtered away in this time (again assuming similar behaviour to 
the standard) is - 100 nm. The D concentration then stabilises 
at about a factor of 5 less than its earlier value. 
The steps up and down in signal levels seen in Figure 7 after 
- 600 and - IO00 s are caused by raising the beam current density 
deliberately by a factor of two and then returning it to the initial 
value. The signals from elements present in the substrate should 
also double. but impurities originating from the vacuum system 
should not respond in this manner. In particular H is always 
present in the system. From the behaviour of the H signal in 
Figure 7 it can be seen that about half of the H at that time is 
really part of the film whilst the rest may be contamination. 
By comparison with Figure 7 and profiles from other samples 
analysed at that time, it seems probable that most if not all of 
the H seen in Figure 6 comes from contamination. It should be 
noted that the relative intensities of the H and D signals cannot 
107 
Standard 2 
106- 
0 100 200 300 400 
Time (s) 
Figure 6. Signal intensities for masses I, 2 and 12 (H, D and C, respec- 
tively) vs sputtering time (i.e. depth) into a D-implanted graphite stan- 
dard. ‘O’L 0 200 400 600 800 l&T&T 
Time (s) 
Figure 7. Signal intensities for masses I, 2 and 12 (H, D and C. respec- 
tively) vs sputtering time (i.e. depth) into sample 4. 
be taken as a measure of their relative quantities in the film, since 
the ion sputtering characteristics and detection efficiencies may 
differ. 
Discussion 
All the analyses of these redeposited films on samples cut from 
the flank of one of the discrete limiters used in JET in 1986 agree 
that the D is peaked within the outermost micron (approximately) 
of the film, and that there is perhaps a similar amount in total in 
the remaining thickness of the film. Thus there is no serious 
discrepancy between any one technique and others. None of the 
techniques offers a non-destructive method of analysing the large 
components likely to be used as PFCs in ITER, and these data 
highlight the problem that surface analysis by NRA (which can 
be done non-destructively) cannot be used to predict bulk com- 
position. 
n-ERDA can provide a quantitative analysis simultaneously 
for each of the isotopes H, D and T through films up to some 
hundreds of microns thick (and would give the ratios H:D:T in 
the outer part of films in the millimetre range. should they occur). 
The method does rely on neutrons penetrating through the sam- 
ple without significant losses, but the resulting limitations on 
sample composition and thickness have not been fully assessed. 
Samples ofgraphite a few millimetres thick as in this work present 
no problem. so it may be possible to analyse through certain first 
wall components, or to arrange for special components with the 
outer few millimetres detachable in areas where rapid film growth 
is expected. If samples have to be cut out for analysis, then cutting 
out samples to a rough thickness tolerance is all that is required 
for n-ERDA as well as the surface layer examination techniques 
like Heavy Ion ERDA and SIMS, whilst that is only the first 
step in the preparation of the sections necessary for Nuclear 
Microprobe analysis. There is also a risk that the polishing pro- 
cess may introduce anomalies into the film analysis, though there 
was no evidence of such problems in this investigation: ion beam 
slope cuttin$’ may offer an alternative preparation method. 
Smearing effects during sectioning would. however, he expected 
989 
J P Goad et al: Hydrogen isotope analysis 
to be too great to allow second order measurements such as 
bulk diffusion to be made using either technique. The Nuclear 
Microprobe could also measure T depth profiles for films 
deposited from D-T plasmas by using a different NRA reaction, 
but, like n-ERDA, does not have the sensitivity to measure the 
T in films deposited from D-D plasmas. Measurement of H by 
ERDA is also possible in principle, but would be very difficult in 
practice due to the glancing angle geometry required. 
The samples used in this work are the only known examples 
of very thick (C 100 microns or more) material redeposited in a 
tokamak, and it was hoped that they would contain significant 
D levels throughout the film to provide a better test for the 
analysis options. The fact that the SIMS analysis previously 
carried out on the tile? showed reduced H and D levels within 
the film means that the localisation of the D to the surface in 
these analyses several years later is unlikely to have occurred 
merely with time. The discrete limiters regularly reached tem- 
peratures in excess of 1000°C at the erosion zones to either side 
of the centre of the tile during plasma pulses, and temperatures 
in the redeposition zone must also have regularly exceeded the 
400°C at which the film starts to degas:” a number of the plasma 
pulses also terminated in disruptions which can cause large tran- 
sient heat loads. Thus thermal outgassing of the samples seems a 
plausible reason for the low total D content of these films, and it 
may be possible for high D levels to exist throughout a thick film 
provided the temperature is always kept low enough. 
Conclusions 
The H, D and T contents of films up to hundreds of microns thick 
can be simultaneously measured quantitatively by n-ERDA. For 
thick film analysis a source of 14 MeV neutrons is required, whilst 
better resolution in depth distributions is obtained using 2.5 MeV 
neutrons. It is intended to develop an n-ERDA analysis facility 
capable of providing both energies in the near future. 
Metallographic sectioning can also be used to provide D depth 
profiles through thick films with the Nuclear Microprobe. These 
tests show that the depth resolution obtainable is a few microns 
using taper sections, which is equivalent to about 1 micron in a 
normal section through the film. Of course considerable effort is 
required to produce the sections, but the polishing process does 
not appear to have a deleterious effect on the profiles. T depth profiles could also be measured for films deposited from D-T 
plasmas. 
These thick (up to 130 micron) redeposited films had a total D 
content no larger than thin films found elsewhere in JET, and the 
D concentration within the surface was at least an order of 
magnitude less than in the outermost 1 micron. It is believed that 
this is caused by thermal outgassing of the films when the limiters 
were heated to - 1000°C by the JET plasma during high power 
discharges and/or as the result of disruptions. 
Acknowledgements 
The help of Dr R Behrisch (Max-Planck Institut fur Plasma- 
physik, Garching) and Dr W Assmann and H Huber (Ludwig 
Maximilians Universitaet Muenchen) with Heavy Ion ERDA 
analysis, Dr S Sugden (AEA Technology) and Dr A Clough 
(Surrey University) with Nuclear Microprobe anaiysis, B Farm- 
ery (Sussex University) with NRA analysis and Dr A Chew 
(Loughborough Consultants) with SIMS analysis is gratefully 
acknowledged. This work was supported by NET in the context 
of the European Home Team contribution to ITER (ITER Task 
T62 of the 1994 Comprehensive Task Agreement). 
References 
’ K L Wilson and W L Hsu, J Nucl Materials, 145-147, 121 (1987). 
‘J P Coad, J Nucl Materials, 226, 156 (1995). 
‘H Bergsaker, R Behrisch, J P Coad, J Ehrenberg, B Emmoth, S K 
Erents, G M McCracken, A P Martinelli and J W Partridge, J Nucl 
Materials, 145-147, 727 (1987). 
‘J P Coad, R Behrisch, H Bergsaker, J Ehrenberg, B Emmoth, J Partridge, 
G Saibene, R Sartori, J C B Simpson and Wen-Min Wang, J Nucl 
Materials, 162, 533 (1989). 
‘G M McCracken, D H J Goodall, P C Stangeby, J P Coad, J Roth, B 
Denne and R Behrisch, ibid, p 356. 
‘W Hauffe, Beitr Elektronenmikr Direktabb Oberji, 23, 305 (1990). 
‘D Grambole, F Herrmann, R Klabes, W Hauffe and R Behrisch, Nuc.1 
Instr and Methods, B68, IS4 (1992). 
‘R Behrisch, R Grotzschel, E Hentschel and W Assmann, ibid, p 245. 
‘U Kreissig, R Grotzschel and R Behrisch, Nucl Instr and Methods, B85, 
71 (1994). 
“‘R Behrisch A P Martinelli, S Grigull, R Grotzschel, U Kreissig, 
Hildebrandt and W Schneider, J Nucl Materials, 220-222, 590 (I 995). D 
“B G Skorodumov. I 0 Yatsevitch, V G Ulanov, E V Zhukovska and 0 
A Zhukovsky, Ntlcl Instr and Methods, B85, 803 (1994). 
“R A Causey, W R Wampler and D Walsh. J Nucl Materials. 176 and 
177,987 (1990). 
990 
