Nuclear Instmnents and Methods in Physics Research B 108 (19%) 75-W) 
Beam InbmcWm 
with MeMiaJs 6. Atom8 
-4 SIMS study on secondary ion formation during 
low-energy methyl ion beam deposition 
Hideki Ohno a0 , Yasushi Aoki ‘, Sir-o Nagai h 
’ Lkponmcnr~~c~. MCLUI Unmnm. 2-I-I Hodokubo. HUUFsht. T&w 191. Jupn 
’ Tdudi Radititmn Chrmistty Rcstwrh F&ir.duwn~. MERI. I2I.I Watamulr+nacht. Takasabsdu 
Gunm;IT)-ttJapna 
Reened 13 March 1995; revtxd form rcccrvad 17 July 1995 
A sooondary ion crass speuromctry tSIMS) study has been carried out durmg ion beam deposition of IO- 100 eV 
CH; or CD; ions on a Ml 1 I) substrate using a highly 5 Ifiis:icatui low-energ UM heam deposition (IBD) 
apparatus combined wllh surface analy& systems. Seconda? +.. kc nrbon ion+ Wtaining up to five carbon atoms 
were observed to be produced. Pesults obtained with CD; iom shoY.cd L&I both ion dcpcnltmn and secondary ion 
fomlatian pmcesxs are dficrent Hove and below an tincider? ti,n . :rgJ of 30 eV. 
- .- - - 
1. I- 
Ion beam deposition (IBD) i: a direct method of 
producing thin films on substrata rcsing 1 ?w+nergy ion 
beams in an uhra high vacuum (W-W). Pr%ous stud- 
kscmp&yingvarious ionbcamsate~lowefthan 
I LeV have shown that IBD has the a&antages of (i) 
epitaxialgrowthofgoodayslallinefilmsevenatsub5- 
trate temperatures [l-31 lower than thme in molecular 
beam epitaxy WBE) and chemical vapor deposition 
KVD). (ii) synthesis of films in metastabk phases such 
as diamond [4,5] and (iii) formation of high quality 
crysullline films l6.a However. littk is known about 
the effects of various deposition parameters tn the 
structure and properties of *ited films. The princi- 
pal parameters inlBD are ion specks. energy and cur- 
rent density of the ion beam, temperature of the subs- 
trate, and pressure in the deposition chamber. The 
final goal of an IBD study is to produce a @line 
film of high quality by axttrolling the film growth 
process on the atomic scale. To approach this goal. it is 
nexxssary to perform IBD experiments using highty 
sophisticated apparatus which aI- one to ~018~. 11 the 
deposition parameters independently and to carry out 
real time observation of the film growth pfxxxss. 
For this purpose, an IBD apparatus combined with 
surface analysis systems was designed and constructed. 
Using this apparatus, a secondary ion mass spectrome- 
try (SIMS) study has been carried out during the bom- 
bardment of low-energy CH; or CD; ions on a Si( I 11) 
l Gxrc.ponding author. Tel + 81 273 46 9422, fax + 81 Z73 
46 9690. rubrtrate. It is erpccterl ,ht scumdary bdroarbon 
IO= if otattved would provide .irformation cm the 
growth proocss of the film by methI ;cr: +xxitint~, 
and u;l the chemical react- Aween in&k? metby 
ions ad the substrate surface. and/or betwea- inci- 
dentrnethyiionsandthegrcMnghbn.CH~ andCD, 
ions are employed here sina carbon films of diamtr;d 
structure have been produced b the CVD technique 
using methane-hydrogen [8J or carbon monoti-hy. 
drogen 191 mixtures where both neutral and ionic forms 
of CH, play an important role in the formation of the 
film. 
2. Experiaemb 
2 I. Ion b2wn dcpsition apamrur 
The apparatus used in this study was design& and 
manufactured on the basis of the tech-i devel- 
oped by Prof. D.G. Annour and his CD-workers at the 
University of Salford [IO) The manufacture was carried 
out by V!W Scientific instruments Ltd., Great Britain. 
AplanviewoftheapparatusisshowninFil.The 
system cons&s of an ion source. a mass separation 
magnet and beam transport system, a target chamber, 
and in situ/real time surface analysis equipment. 
The ion source is of the Freeman type which has an 
oven for heating solid materials. Ions generated in the 
ion source are extracted with a voltage of - 10 kV, and 
pass thiorgh the mass separation magnet, the fucusing 
lens, the neutral trap, the elecvon suppressor, and the 
deceleration lens, and tinally impinge on the target. 
The ion source potential is biased at a positive voltage 
016&583X/%/f15.@l Q 19% E%evier Sciena 8.V. All rights reserved 
SSDJ 0168-583X(95)00872-1 
76 H. Ohno et 01. / Nucl. Insrr. ond Merh. in Phys. Res. R IO8 llW61 75 - 80 
(source voltage) with respect to the target maint,r,.tcd 
at earth potential. The beamline consr\ts of two con- 
centric tubes. 1 he outer tuhe. which serves as the 
vacuum enclosure, is kept at earth potential, while the 
inner tu’ne floats at - 10 kV with respect to the Ion 
source. The ion incident energy is determined by the 
ion source potential. The final energy at the target can 
be varied in the raqe from 10 eV to 10 keV. The 
deposition area on the substrate is about 10 X IO mm’. 
The focusing lens in the beamline is operated hy the 
first and second adjustable focus potentials [maxima JO 
and 5 kV, respectively). Lrsc of the focusing lens allows 
adjustment of the ion beam intensity on the target to a 
maxrmunt. The neutral trsp to ;cn:ovc neutrals from 
t hc ham consists of three parrs of dcflcctor plates and 
I. TARGET CHAMBER 
2 SAMPLE MANIPULATOR 
3 ANALYZER 
4. FAST INIRO LOCK 
5 ROI-ARY RACK AND PINION PROBE 
6. FRIbrlT’ TUBE RElRACllON MECHANISM 
7. GATE VALVE 
8. ??:CEI ::RATtON LENS ASSEhfW-Y 
9 PF’;(I L‘ ,.’ ‘T 
IO ANALYSIS M:AGNFI 
I I. MAGNET TANK a movable pIat.: with an aperture. The electron sup- 
11, ..Jor placci at the exit of the flight tube is at a 
voltage of - I k\’ with respect IO the flight tube. 
The target holder is mounted on a manipulator 
which has tivc degrees of motion, three linear motions 
and tutl rotations. Also mounted on the manipulator 
are a reservoir of fiqurd nitrogen to cool the samples 
and a small size f 1 mm’ aperture) Faraday cup to 
measure the current density distrrhution of the deposi- 
tion heam. Sample heating wn be carried OUI by an 
electric heater mounted on the backside of the sample 
holder. In addition to the facilities mentroned above, 
the target chamber is quipped with systems of residual 
pas analysis (RGA). Auger clc%tron spectroscopy (AES). 
ion scattering spectroscqy (IS!9 reflection high energy 
12. FLIGHT TUBE 
i 3. SOURCE CHAMBER 
14. ION SOURCE REAR LOADER ASSEMBLY 
15. ION SOURCE 
16. FLIGHT TUBE SECl-lON 
17. FOCUSING LENS /NEUTRAL DUMP 
: 3. SOURCE MAGNFT 
19. APERTl’a LINEAR DRWE 
‘I- CG TROL UNIT 
2;. ION SOURCE POWER SUPPLY 
22. ElAxrRoNic SYSTEM 
Fig. I. Plan view of the low-energy ion b-am deposition system. 
H. Ohno ct aL / NucL Insrr. Md hi& in F%ys. Res. t’ . cb ‘:9k I - - 80 77 
lo-100 eV 
CH3+ or CD3+ 
0.1~IpAh? 
Q-jmk analyzer 
ckctron diffr-Aon (RHEED), and SrxxMdary )(M ~.irss 
spatmmeUy (SlhW for in situ/real time surface anal- 
ysis of -ted lb? films. 
The pressure in the Iargel chamber can reach the 
IO-” Pa region using six differential pumping sfapes. 
whik the pressure in oh ion souru chamhcr a about 
1 x lo-’ Pa. The typical y.ssu,-c maintained in the 
tarp3 dumber during LM ham depklicm is usu.+. 
onflbcofdcrof1o-“/I 
PeffoImUnx tests cn’ :F& ;,yxzt:tis 3iWLJ rhat nm 
bcamdvarious 5pebeswchasAr’.C andco’ 
can be obtained with cnegics down to 10 eV and cvrrent &r&es eweeding 1 .O pA/cm’ mer a surface 
area oi 10 ‘* 10 mm: m 3 X 10 * Pa. 
The *uC”rr~cs uxd wcrc mmcrc?al~ nailabk 
sir 11’; waim 05 mm thwi; Wun-E&u HamAnal). l?x 
SI tirnp.c’ in ik tangti chamher was ckaned by 3 kcV 
.t ’ yin hanturdmc.-c befcwc SIMS cxpcriment. CH; 
( > 99.5) or CD, f :a ?? l - ’ gas ~1s admttted into the 
n)n tirce. T?be K)o) exfr40rd h<nn the source w8zre 
mu scparatcd u) otttan a CH; nr ?D; ior, ka.n. 
ink 15 
Fig. 3. Mass spectrum of scattered and secondary ions measured during hydrocarbon film deposition with 50 eV CH; ions on 
Si(lll). 
78 H. Ohnn PI al. / Nucl. 1n.w and Merh. in Phyc. RCA. R 10X C/V%) 75 - 80 
The ion beam was mcidcnt on SitI 11) at 7” relati\ : to 
the surface in ultra high vacuum (< ii) -’ Pa). Sec- 
ondary ion mass spectra were recorded by a quadrupole 
mass spectrometer repeatedly during the deposition of 
CH; or CD,’ ions with energy betwtren 10 and 100 cV 
and current density 0.1-1.0 *A/cm’. All the SIMS 
experiments were carried out al room temperature. 
The angle berwebn the’ axis of the incident ion beam 
and Ihat of the quadrupolc mass spectromeler was 
maintained at W (see Fig. 2). The deposition ume wa\ 
typically I h. corresponding 10 a fuencc of about 
2.3 x IO” to 2.25 x IO’5 tons/cm~. 
3. Results 
Fig. 3 show\ a rn;Lti speclrum from a St1 I 11) suh- 
(rate during tromhardmrnt with 50 eV CH ; ions. The 
spectrum consists of many peaks which a~rrespond IO 
hyatrocarbon ions (C,H: 1 with maSs m/e - I?m + n 
up to m - 5. The highest peak observed at m/c - I5 
. ‘-‘es from the c*la\tic scattering of incident Ions (CH { ) 
at the substrate surface. The peak heights of secondary 
hydrcKarbon ions relative to that of scattered incident 
I 9’ * .nll IT) dcL-rc:asc ;th Increasing number of carbon 
,” 1 II*. I,,&,, .q1t,111 ,I’ ‘, ;’ ;nrgh therL wk.. .! <MI- 
I)ir,,y 111.11 Si’ and some Si-crmtaining secondary ions 
wcrc produced. it was confirmed in separate experi- 
ments that the conlribution of such ions to the observed 
SIMS spectrum was negligibly small. As far as the 
secondary hydrocarbon ions of m - 2 are concerned. 
there is no marked difference in the pattern of the 
SIMS spectra even when the incident energy is changed 
in the range IO- 100 eV. 
SIMS spectra were then recorded by bombardmem 
of IO0 cV Ar ’ ions on substrates either previousty 
bombarded or not bombarded with CH; ions. The 
spcctnrm observed for a substrate previously bom- 
hardcd with CHf ions was similar 10 that oberved 
during CH; ion bombardment (Fig. 3). On the other 
hand, no hydrocarbon peaks were detected when a Si 
substrate without ,Jrevious CH; ion bombardment was 
bombarded with Ar l ions. 
After bombardment with CH; ions. the Si(lll) 
substrate was bombarded with 100 eV Ar’ ions while 
SIMS spectra were continuously monitored. The change 
in the intensity of m/e = 15.27 and 29 peaks with Ar’ 
sputtering time is shown in Fig. 4. It can be seen that 
no appreciable change in the relative intensities is 
observed among the three peaks. These results indicate 
that incident CH; ions certainly deposit on the Si 
substrate surface. 
Bombardment of a Si(l11) substrate with CD; ions 
also produced SIMS spectra comprised of various kinds 
of hydrocarbon ions. Fig. 5 shows a comparison of 
SIMS spectra of the C, hydrocarbon ion group for 1 
20 40 60 
Sputtering time (tin) 
Ftg 4 <hanp In the pcld of secondary morn CH ;. CIH; 
and C,tI; spullcd by Klo cv Ar- Km from tllc film 
prcxousty dqned by CH ; WWK on a !4 I I I) surfatx nth 
\9ulI<nng tune. 
CD; ion bombardment with those for CH; ion bom- 
bardment at four different ion energies. In Fii Sa. 
mass peaks 27 and 29 appear with high intcnsitti 
relative to other peaks over the whole energy range 
studied. indicating that C2H; and C,H; are the main 
components of the C2H: ions produced by CH; ion 
bombardment. It is expected from this result that C2D; 
(mass 30) and C,D; (34) ions arc the main secondrrry 
species produced by CD,’ ion bombardment. However. 
the observed spectra in Fig, 5b show that seamdaq 
ions with m/c - 27. 28. 29 and 30 are produced com- 
parably by CD; ions. This indicates that CD,’ ion 
bombardment produces secondary ions including H 
atoms in addition to the C2D; ion. On assuming the 
dominant formation of C?H;. CtH; and their D 
atom-substituted ions by analogy with the result for 
CD; ion bombardment, the four mass peaks can be 
assigned to C,H; for m/e = 27, C,H2D+ for m/e = 
28. C,HDf and C,H; for m/e = 29, and C,D; and 
CZH,D * for m/e = 30. respectively. In order to ex- 
plain the formation of secondary hydrocarbon ions 
including H atornts), it is necessary to invoke the effect 
of the residual gas on the formation of secondary ions, 
i.e. incorporation of H atoms from the residual gas into 
the growing film. This seems highly probable in the 
present experiment where ion beam deposition was 
carried out using current density of 0.1-1.0 &A/cm* 
under a pressure of 5 lo-’ Pa. 
H. Ohno CI al / NucL Itwr. and Mtth. m Phvs. Rd.,. I !u. 1 W ,I -; - 80 79 
As can be seen from Fig. 5. the SlMS spectrum for 
CD; ion bombardment changes with the incident ion 
energy, in contrast to that for CH; ion bombardment 
where the C,H; ion is the most abundant over the 
entire energy range studied. With 20 eV CD; ions. 
mass peak 29 is the most intense. Although this peak is 
thought to be due to C,HD{ and C,H; ions as 
already mentioned. the latter contribution !O the peak 
must be small since the yield is lower than that of 
C,H, (mass 27). On increasing the incident CD; ion 
energy, the relative intensities of mass peaks 27, 28 and 
29 change graddly and rnw peak 27 r:mmes the 
most intense above 40 eV. D-c SIMS spectra for CD; 
ions at hq# energies f L SO eV) resemble those kr 
CH; ionswJthat forAr* ionhombardmcnton~St 
substrate prcvr.msly bombarded with CH r ions. 
4. Dk8ssim 
In order to eonsidcr the mcchamrm of \c-cvndae 
(a) Cb+ 
L 2oeV ion formation durmg film -growth, we stimmarlLr: the 
resul;\ of the present SIMS expcrimtints as follow,. 
(11 
(2) 
(3) Seaxxla~ hydrocarbon ions containing up to five 
carbon atoms are observed in the SIMS spectra 
when CH{ or CD,’ tons arc hombardcd upon 
Si( I I1 1 substrate% and when Ar - ions are hom- 
barded upon a Si substrate after bombardment 
with methyl ions. but are not observed when or’ 
ions are bombarded upon a clean Ml1 1) sub- 
tratc. 
In the bombardment by CH; tortx. no marked 
difference is obsetved tn the SIMS qccfra of the 
C,Hi group with rqard to the meidcnt energy 
(IO- 100 eV). 
In the bombardment by CD; ions. an inctdcnt 
LncrQ’ dqwndence is observed m the rrlatr\c 
idtic) amng the peaks of the C: groups IX 4x the 
CD; bon cncrm dewcases down to 31 cV, the 
r 4atrve yeIds of hydrocarhm wm, (C,!I,D; 1 
II,. .Ane mcwc’ D atoms mcreax’. 
(W CD,’ 
A 2ocv 
~ A- IOOCV 
m/e 27 29 31 JillhAL 4OCV 
AAIVIM- SOeV 
27 29 31 
Fig. 5. SIMS qxctra observed during CH; and CD; ion beam deposition on Si(l11). 
80 H. Ohm et aL / Nucl. In.w. and Merh. in Php. Res. R 108 (IV96) 75 - 80 
Result (1) evidently indicates that the incic! nt 
methyl ions contribute to both the &position and 
production of secondary ions. Results (2) and (3) can 
be understood if we assume that both the deposition 
and the sputtering processes depend on the incident 
ion energy. In the higher energy range (E, i 30 eV), 
the deposition of incident ions in their primary form is 
inefficient, and th< ions undergo decomposition into 
fragment ions and atoms, followed by deposition on the 
SuDslrate surface. During film growth, many hydrogen 
atoms and/or molecules from the residual gas would 
be incorporated into the him. ‘I hk can explain the 
result that the yield of C2HD; ions is lower than that 
of C,H; ions when CD,’ Lens arc tc~+tcd at cncrgies 
E,, higher than 30 eV. On the other hand, in the 
E, s 30 CV regton. deposition in the primary form 
proceeds more efficiently and the amount of hydrogen 
incorporated from the residual gas into the film can be 
reduced. This explains why the yield of secondary hy- 
drocarbon ions containing more D atoms increases 
with decreasing incident ion energy. The lack of an 
K +:nt energy drpendence of SIMS speara for CH; 
ion bombardment rnc: simply come from the fact that 
the above-described energy dependence of the deposi- 
lw‘7 prW’,‘sq is ?clt r&‘ccted in the structure of the 
gr,**u;w S!r.. for ‘n&ic . c ‘f , vu. 
I IK SIMS spectra obtained for CD,+ ions at higher 
energies ( > SO eV) were similar lo those for Ar* ions 
incident on the Si substrate previowly bombarded with 
CH,; ions. This indicates that, at higher energies, the 
secondary ions are produced mainly by physical sput- 
tering of mokcuks constituting the film. Incident CH; 
or CD; ions 4t an energy below 20 eV may not be 
efficient in physical sputtering of the surface because 
the energy is lower than the displacement threshold 
energy for carbon atoms at the surface. Titus. mast of 
the secondary ions from low-energy ion bombardment 
must bc produced by chemical reaction between the 
incident ions and the surface of the produced film. 
5. CoacJusion 
hrethyl ions (CH; and CD; ) incident at energies of 
lo- 100 eV on Si substrates produce hydrocarbon films 
on the Si surface and produce secondary hydrocarbon 
ions as welt. 6) At :ow energies (< 30 eV), the residual gas has 
little et&c* on the deposition of the film, and 
secondary ions are produced mainly by chemical 
reactiolt between the incident ions and th: surface 
of the growing film. 
(ii) AI higher energies ( > 30 eV). methyl ion bom- 
bardment is accornpanicd by dissociation of inci- 
dent ions into fragment ions and atoms at or near 
the surface of the substrate. During film growth 
by the fragments, many hydrogen atoms or 
molecules from the residual gas are incorporated 
into the film, resulting in the production of sec- 
ondary hydrocarbon ions which ~ntain hydrogen 
atoms origina:ing from the residual gas. 
AWIlls 
One of the authors 01.0.’ i.. pleased to ac- 
knowledge Prof. Testuo Nagata and Associate Prof. 
Kazuo Goda of Meisei University for helpful discus- 
sions. 
Rtlrrcaccs 
III T. Tokuyama. K. Yagr,. K. Mryake. M. Tamma. N. Nu- 
suaki and S. T&i, Nud. Instr. and Meth. 182/183(IW) 
241. 
121 RA. Zuhr. SJ. Pennycoo&. TS. No&e, N. Herbuts, 7.E 
Ham and RR Appleton, Nud. Instr. and Meth B 
37/38 (1989) lb 
131 K.G. Orrman-Rasiter. AH. hl&yati, D.G. Armour. 
SE Dandy asxl J.A van den Be% Nud. Instr. and 
Meth. 6 59/60 (1991) 197. 
141 J. Jshikawa. K. Ogawa K. Mipta, H. Tmji and 7. Takagi. 
NIKI. Instr. and Meth. B 21 (198n 205. 
ISI S. Kasi. H. Rang and J.W. Rabatais, Phys Rev. Len. 50 
(1940 75. 
161 K Mipkc. K Oh&i and M. Komuro. M&r. Rcr. Sec. 
symp. Proc. 279 ( 1993) 787. 
171 S. Shim&u. N. Sasaki and S. Seki. Jpn. J. Appl. phyr 32 
(1993) L943. 
It31 For example, Y. Saito. IL Sate. H. Tanaka K. Fujita and 
S. Matsuda J. Mater. sci. 23 (1988) 842 
191 For exaqk. Y. Mutwaka. H. Yarnashita and H. 
Miyadera. J. Mater. sd. 26 WWI) 3235. 
(IO] D.G. Armour. P. Bel!ey md G. Sbarpk. Vacuum 36 
( 1986) 769. 
