Pergamon Corrosion Science, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 155-170. 1996 
Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain 
001&938X/96 $15.00+0.00 
0010-938X(96)00123-9 
ALUMINIUM-MAGNESIUM ALLOYS AS CORROSION 
RESISTANT COATINGS FOR STEEL 
K.R. BALDWIN,’ R.I. BATES,* R.D. ARNELL* and C.J.E. SMITH’ 
I Structural Materials Centre, Defence Research Agency, Farnborough, Hampshire GUI4 6TD, U.K. 
’ Research Institute for Design, Manufacture and Marketing, University of Salford, Salford M5 4WT, U.K 
Abstract-The corrosion behaviour of binary aluminium-magnesium (Al-Mg) alloy coatings deposited on to steel 
panels using an unbalanced magnetron sputtering technique has been studied. Neutral salt fog tests have shown 
that the corrosion resistance of sputtered aluminium alloy coatings increases as the magnesium content is raised 
until an optimum is reached for alloys containing approximately 20 wt% Mg. Increasing the magnesium content 
above 20wt% did not give further improvements in protection but instead caused a decline in corrosion 
performance. Potentiodynamic cathodic polarization sweeps conducted in 600 mmol 1-l sodium chloride solution 
have shown that the corrosion current density of sputtered aluminium coatings is increased as the magnesium 
content is increased, suggesting that there is a reduction in barrier protection afforded by the Al coatings as the Mg 
level is raised. Open-circuit corrosion potential measurements have shown that the sputtered aluminium alloys 
become progressively more active as the magnesium content is increased, suggesting that they afford improved 
sacrificial protection as the Mg level is raised. It is proposed that the peak in performance observed in the neutral 
salt fog environment represents an optimum balance between the barrier and sacrificial properties of the Al-Mg 
coatings. 
Keywords: A. aluminium, A. magnesium, A. metal coatings, B. polarization, C. sputtered films. 
INTRODUCTION 
Aluminium coatings are used on an industrial scale and can be applied using a variety of 
methods including metal spraying, hot dipping or cladding. Where fine tolerances are 
required, aluminium coatings can be deposited by electrodeposition from organic 
electrolytes1-6 or, more usually, by ion-vapour deposition (IVD) or other vacuum 
techniques.7-‘3 Since the early 1970s aluminium coatings deposited by the IVD route have 
been produced commercially and the technology required to obtain controlled thicknesses 
on both simple and complex shapes is well established. Aluminium coatings are now 
routinely employed for corrosion protection, decoration of metallic and non-metallic 
surfaces and have been suggested as a means of cladding less corrosion resistant aluminium 
alloy substrates.14 A further advantage of aluminium coatings is that they are receptive to 
conventional chromate passivation treatments. 
Aluminium coatings are used for the corrosion protection of ferrous substrates for two 
main reasons. Firstly, aluminium with its air-formed passive oxide film forms an effective 
barrier layer against attack and, secondly, if the underlying substrate is exposed at, for 
example, the base of pre-existing defects or corrosion pits, the aluminium coating will afford 
a degree of sacrificial protection to the substrate. A further advantage with aluminium 
Manuscript received 1 June 1995 
0 Crown copyright (I 995). 
155 
156 K.R. Baldwin et al 
coatings is that their corrosion potentials are relatively close to those of many structural 
aerospace aluminium alloys and hence there is very little driving force for galvanic corrosion 
between them.i5-” Thus the use of aluminium coatings on, for example, steel fasteners, will 
serve to reduce bimetallic corrosion between steel components and the structural aluminium 
alloys with which they may come into contact. 
A disadvantage of aluminium coatings deposited by IVD is that they are often columnar 
and porous in nature.‘-12 This porous structure may result in inefficient barrier protection 
and the premature breakdown of the coating since the substrate is rapidly exposed to the 
corrosive environment at the base of the pores. The porosity of IVD aluminium coatings can 
be reduced by compacting the surface with post-plating glass-bead peening treatments. 
Electrolytically deposited aluminium coatings are generally more dense than as-plated IVD 
aluminium and thus the former may afford high levels of protection to steel substrates when 
exposed to aggressive chloride bearing environments.i6*‘* 
Recent advances at the University of Salford have enabled aluminium coatings to be 
obtained using unbalanced magnetron sputtering.” Aluminium coatings deposited using 
this vacuum technique are dense and non-columnar with significantly improved barrier 
properties over those produced by conventional ion-plating. Magnetron-sputtering can be 
used to deposit not only pure metals such as aluminium but also alloy coatings with 
controlled compositions. A drawback with pure aluminium is that since its corrosion 
potential is not far removed from that of many steels, it is unable to provide adequate levels 
of sacrificial protection, particularly under natural exposure conditions.2s22 Earlier work at 
DRA Farnborough2’ has shown that if aluminium is alloyed with small amounts of active 
metals such as magnesium, its corrosion potential can be depressed, leading to a significant 
improvement in sacrificial properties. In the present work, an unbalanced magnetron 
sputtering technique has been used to deposit Al-Mg alloys with both improved barrier and 
sacrificial properties. Aluminium alloys containing up to 50% Mg and above have been 
deposited on to steel substrates and the corrosion behaviour of the sputtered deposits 
determined using neutral salt fog tests and electrochemical techniques. Particular attention 
has been paid to determining the effects of magnesium additions on the barrier and 
sacrificial properties of aluminium. 
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS 
The production of coatings 
Pure Al and Al-Mg alloy coatings were deposited using an unbalanced magnetron- 
sputtering technique at the University of Salford. The use of magnetron-sputtering has been 
reviewed in several published articles23-25 and precise details of the unit and its operation in 
the present work are described elsewhere.” 
In the present work, mild steel test panels of 1 mm thickness (50 x 50 mm dimensions) 
were initially degreased using an ultrasonic bath containing alcohol and then placed in the 
vacuum chamber. The magnetron sputtering chamber was evacuated to lo-’ Torr or below 
and then backfilled with high purity argon to typically 5 x lop3 Torr. The chamber 
contained two consumable targets, one of commercial grade aluminium (99.4% purity) and 
one of commercial grade magnesium (99.5% purity). Prior to deposition, the steel test 
panels were sputter cleaned, typically at an applied voltage of 1 kV for 30 min, to remove 
any traces of surface contamination. 
Following this high voltage sputter cleaning process, a low-voltage was applied to the test 
Aluminium-magnesium alloys 157 
panels, typically - 50 V (DC), to provide an external bias during deposition. Unbalanced 
magnetron sputtering utilises the plasma in front of the metal targets to self bias the 
substrates during deposition. In the present work, this was achieved by weakening the 
magnetic field strengths of the targets and allowing the plasma to escape the confines of the 
target surface and engulf the substrates. However, due to the large substrate assembly, in 
relation to the size of the targets, and the fact that the targets are only slightly unbalanced, the 
coating facility at Salford necessitates the use of an external bias supply during deposition. 
The targets were energised using an electrical current, to typical power levels of 3 kW for 
the aluminium target and 1.5 kW for magnesium target. The power levels were varied to 
obtain the required ratio of Al:Mg in the deposits by producing different sputtering rates. 
The coating process was continued for a sufficient time to allow the required thickness of 
deposit to build up on the substrates. After the required thickness had been obtained, the 
deposition process was halted and the coupons allowed to cool under vacuum to prevent 
oxidation. A typical deposition rate for the pure Al and Al-Mg alloy coatings was 
0.3 pm min-’ , depending on the power supplied to the targets. 
The composition of each alloy coating was checked using electron-microprobe analysis. 
The sputtering process was used to produce coatings with thicknesses of 5, 7.5, 10, 15, 25 
and 2.5 pm. The thickness of each coating was measured prior to testing using a non- 
destructive eddy-current method. The coatings were not subjected to any post-plating 
treatments and were tested in the as-plated condition only. 
Neutral salt fog tests 
The corrosion resistance of as-plated pure Al and Al-Mg alloy coatings containing up to 
60 wt% Mg were evaluated using neutral salt fog tests conducted in accordance with ASTM 
Bl 17.26 The salt fog cabinet was fed from a reservoir containing 5% w/v NaCl solution with 
no pH adjustment. The NaCl solution was pumped to an atomizing jet and compressed air 
directed into the stream of solution to produce a dense salt fog. The test panels were 
mounted on Perspex racks at an angle of 20” to the vertical and inspected daily for signs of 
corrosion. 
Open-circuit potential measurements 
Open-circuit corrosion potential measurements were conducted using test electrodes 
constructed from as-plated pure Al and Al-Mg alloy coatings of 25 pm thickness on steel 
substrates, The test electrodes were separately immersed in 600 mmol 1-l (3.5% w/v) NaCl 
solution (100 ml) contained in polypropylene beakers. The beakers were positioned in a 
water bath maintained at 25 f 2°C. A Luggin capillary, in solution contact with an external 
reference electrode (SCE), was positioned adjacent to the surface of each test electrode and 
the potential measured at 30 min intervals using a programmable voltmeter. The 
experiments were halted after 200 h in each case. 
Polarization sweeps 
Cathodic potentiodynamic polarization sweeps were carried out in a conventional three- 
electrode glass cell using test electrodes constructed from sputtered pure Al and Al-Mg 
alloy coatings of 25 pm thickness. The test electrodes were immersed in 600 mmol 1-l NaCl 
solution at 25 + 1 “C contained in the glass cell. Prior to each sweep, the test electrodes were 
permitted to stabilise for approximately 30 min. Immediately following the stabilisation 
period, the electrodes were polarized cathodically at a sweep rate of 0.125 mV SF’. The 
158 K.R. Baldwin et al. 
sweeps were conducted in solutions which were gently aerated both before and during the 
experiment. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
Coating microstructure 
The microstructure of magnetron-sputtered pure Al and Al-Mg alloy coatings was 
investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Figure l(a) shows the surface of a 
pure Al sputter deposit on a steel substrate. The pure Al coating was flat and almost 
completely featureless which is typical of the dense, non-columnar, coatings which can be 
deposited by unbalanced magnetron sputtering.” The pure Al coating appeared to afford 
complete coverage to the substrate and was almost completely free of holidays (small pores) 
or other microscopic surface defects. 
(a) Pm Aluminium 
(c) Al-32 wt% Mg (d) k-57 wt% r&g 
w 
Fig. 1. SEM micrographs of fracture cross-sections of unbalanced magnetron sputtered pure Al 
and AI-Mg alloy coatings on steel substrates. The black bar at the bottom is 4 pm long. 
Aluminium-magnesium alloys 159 
Figures l(b)-l(d) show fracture cross-sections of Al alloy coatings containing 5, 32 and 
57 wt% Mg. The Al-Mg alloy coatings were similar to pure Al in that the sputter deposits 
were flat and generally featureless indicating that the Mg content had very little effect on the 
microstructure of the coatings. The pure Al and Al-Mg alloy coatings exhibited extremely 
good adhesion to the steel substrate. 
Neutral salt fog tests 
The corrosion of the sputtered pure Al and Al-Mg alloy deposits containing up to 
30 wt% Mg in the salt fog environment was initially characterized by the formation of large 
pits in the coating surface, although the coatings remained generally bright. White corrosion 
products, commonly termed white-rust, were found to build-up in the region of the pits and 
this was usually accompanied by the formation of gelatinous corrosion products. The Al 
alloy coatings containing over 30 wt% Mg were generally less susceptible to localized pitting 
attack but instead appeared to corrode in a more uniform manner. 
With prolonged exposure to the salt fog, the coatings ceased to provide full protection 
against attack and corrosion of the underlying metal occurred, giving rise to the formation 
of red-rust, the iron oxide (FezOs) corrosion products of the ferrous substrate. Figure 2 
illustrates the time taken for the appearance of first red-rust as a function of alloy Mg 
content for 8 pm thick coatings. It was found that the time to red-rust increased as the alloy 
Mg content was increased until a peak in corrosion performance was obtained for Al alloys 
containing approximately 20 wt% Mg. Further increases in the magnesium content were of 
no further benefit but instead caused a decrease in the corrosion resistance of the Al-Mg 
I I I I I 
10 20 30 40 50 
Ut X Mg alloying addition 
Fig. 2. The relationship between time to red-rust and alloy composition for 8 pm thick unbalanced 
magnetron sputtered AI-Mg alloy coatings on steel-exposed to continuous neutral salt fog. 
160 K.R. Baldwin et al. 
alloy coatings. Figure 2 shows that the sputtered Ai- wt% Mg alloy delayed the onset of 
red-rust for almost twice as long as the pure aluminium coatings. 
The effect of coating thickness on time to red-rust for sputtered pure Al and Al alloys 
containing 5, 10, 15, 30 and 55 wt% magnesium is given in Fig. 3. For pure aluminium 
coatings, the time to red-rust increased linearly as the thickness was increased, which is in 
good agreement with earlier work’6,18 on the corrosion behaviour of IVD pure Al coatings 
in the neutral salt fog environment. Figure 3 shows that, in contrast with the pure Al 
coatings, for the Al-Mg alloys as the Mg level was increased up to 30 wt%, a significant 
deviation from linearity occurred in the thickness-time to red-rust relationship. This was 
particularly pronounced for the Al-30 wt% Mg alloy coatings, where the time to red-rust 
increased sharply for a relatively small increase in coating thickness. When the 
concentration of magnesium metal was increased to 55 wt%, a return to linear behaviour 
was obtained. 
Information relating to the kinetics of coating breakdown can be obtained by 
determining the rate at which red-rust forms on the panel surfaces once full barrier and 
sacrificial protection have been lost. The relationship between the area of red-rust and 
exposure time for 8pm thick sputtered coatings is shown by Fig. 4. For pure Al and the Al 
alloys containing up to 35 wt% magnesium, the spread of red-rust was limited, with the area 
of rust increasingly very slowly for extended exposure periods. Following this initial period, 
where the coating remained largely intact, the rate of coating loss increased sharply with the 
Time tD red-rust Ihours) 
Fig. 3. The relationship between coating thickness and time to red-rust for unbalanced magnetron 
sputtered pure Al and Al-Mg alloy coatings on steel-exposed to continuous neutral salt fog. 
Aluminium-magnesium alloys 161 
Exposure time (hours) 
Fig. 4. The relationship between area of red-rust and exposure time for unbalanced magnetron 
sputtered pure Al and AI-Mg alloy coatings on steel-exposed to continuous neutral salt fog. 
sputtered deposits being rapidly consumed. It is possible that this type of behaviour was 
related to the dense nature of the sputtered deposits. The coatings may have become very 
thin before a significant area of the substrate became exposed to the corrodant so that rapid 
corrosion of the underlying steel would have only occurred at the moment when the coating 
was finally lost. Figure 4 shows that the Al-55 wt% Mg alloy coating was consumed rapidly 
once red-rust had initiated, reflecting the poor corrosion resistance of this high-Mg alloy. 
Open circuit potential measurements 
The variation in open circuit corrosion potential, EC,,,, with time for sputtered pure Al 
and the alloys containing 5, 10, 1.5, 25 and 55 wt% Mg, recorded during immersion in 
quiescent 600 mmol 1-l NaCl solution, is shown by Fig. 5. The test electrode constructed 
from pure Al initially adopted a potential of - 0.90 V (SCE) in the chloride solution. The 
potential then increased sharply over the first few hours of immersion to a value of 
approximately - 0.74 V (SCE) which is similar to that previously recorded for ion-plated 
aluminium in quiescent sodium chloride solutions.16*18 The corrosion behaviour of the pure 
Al coatings was characterized by frequent potential fluctuations of up to 0.1 V in magnitude, 
which are usually attributed to the effects of localized corrosion such as pitting attack.27-30 
Figure 5 shows that for aluminium alloys containing the lower magnesium contents of 
15 wt% and below, similar potential-time behaviour was observed to that obtained for 
sputtered pure aluminium, with a steep rise in potential being followed by a period of rapid 
potential fluctuations. In contrast, when the alloy magnesium content was further increased 
to 25 wt%, the open circuit potential was generally more stable with the fluctuations in 
potential being less pronounced. This suggests that the Al alloys containing moderate levels 
of magnesium may be more resistant to pitting attack than pure Al or those containing low 
levels of Mg, supporting the observations made in the salt fog environment. This trend was 
continued with the aluminium alloy containing 55 wt% magnesium, where very few 
potential fluctuations were observed. However, the Al-55 wt% Mg alloy behaved 
differently from the alloys which were mainly composed of Al in that following a very 
large rise in open-circuit potential in the first 100 h of immersion, the potential did not 
stabilise but continued to drift in a noble direction. 
162 K.R. Baldwin er al. 
Pure Aluminium 
Time lhoursl 
jg -1.01 0 100 200 
Tlme (hours1 4 
(D Al-5% Mg -0.6 v . m , , , , , , 
Time Ihours) 
Time lhoursl 
Time fhoursl Time Ihours) 
Fig. 5. The variation in open circuit corrosion potential with time for unbalanced magnetron 
sputtered pure Al and AI-Mg alloy coatings containing 5, IO. 15, 25 and 55 wt% Mg, determined in 
quiescent 600 mmol I-’ sodium chloride solution. 
The average open-circuit corrosion potential of the sputtered deposits was calculated 
over the 200 h immersion period in 600 mmol 1-t NaCl solution. Figure 6 illustrates the 
relationship between the average open-circuit corrosion potential and Al-Mg alloy 
composition. This plot shows that the average potential of the Al alloys became 
increasingly negative as the Mg content was increased, which is in line with a previous 
study on Al-Mg alloys carried out at DRA Farnborough.” The open-circuit corrosion 
potential of bare steel has been determined in earlier workI and a value of -0.67 V (SCE) 
Aluminium-magnesium alloys 163 
-0.6 - 
iii 
ti r___-___-___________-~--- E eOPr tsteell------- 
-0.7 - 
a, 
: -1.0 - 
& 
z -1.1- 
I 0 I I I I I 10 20 30 40 50 
WtX Mg alloying addition 
Fig. 6. The relationship between average open circuit corrosion potential and alloy composition for 
unbalanced magnetron sputtered AI-Mg alloy coatings, determined over 200 h immersion in 
600 mmol 1-l NaCl solution. 
was obtained in quiescent 600 mmol 1-l NaCl solution. Figure 6 shows that the sputtered 
deposits were negative with respect to bare steel and that the Al alloys will become 
increasingly sacrificial as the concentration of the more active Mg metal is increased. 
Potentiodynamic polarization sweeps 
The cathodic polarization sweeps obtained for magnetron-sputtered pure Al and 
selected Al-Mg alloys in aerated 600 mmol 1-l NaCl solution are shown by Fig. 7. For the 
pure Al coatings, a rapid increase in current density was initially observed close to the open- 
circuit potential. The cathodic response then showed highly polarized behaviour, with only 
a very small increase in current density being observed for a large increase in overpotential. 
This behaviour is typical of corrosion processes that are under diffusion control, e.g. oxygen 
reduction.31 
Figure 7 shows that the cathodic polarization response of the Al-Mg alloys was similar 
to that obtained for pure Al in that diffusion controlled cathodic reactions appeared to be 
predominant. However, it was found that the polarization curves obtained for the Al-Mg 
alloy coatings were, in most cases, less polarized than pure aluminium, with the alloys 
showing some deviation from purely diffusion limited behaviour, particularly at the higher 
overpotentials. 
A further effect of increasing the alloy magnesium content was to shift the cathodic 
polarization curves to progressively higher current densities. The corrosion current density 
was determined for each sputtered deposit using a Tafel extrapolation technique.32 The 
corrosion current density values obtained are plotted logarithmically as a function of 
magnesium content by Fig. 8. This plot shows that the corrosion current density of the Al 
alloys increased as the Mg content was increased and suggests that the barrier corrosion 
resistance of sputtered Al will be progressively diminished as the concentration of Mg in the 
alloys is raised. 
164 K.R. Baldwin et al 
-7oc 
-900 
z 
5: 
: 
> -1100 E 
r( II) .?I JJ 
s &J -1300 
a0 
-1500 M9 
.5x M9 
-3 -2 -1 0 i 
Log.Current Density $tA/mmz) J 
I 
2 
Fig. 7. Cathodic potentiodynamic polarization sweeps of unbalanced magneton sputtered pure Al 
and AI-Mg alloy coatings in aerated 600mmoll-’ sodium chloride solution. Sweep rate: 
0.125mVs-‘. 
Figure 7 showed that as the alloy magnesium content was increased the cathodic 
polarization curves were shifted to lower potentials. The relationship between the corrosion 
current density and the open circuit potentials of the sputtered deposits determined after 1 h 
immersion in aerated 600 mmol I-‘NaCl solution is shown by Fig. 9. The plot obtained for 
the Al-Mg alloys indicates that the corrosion current density increased as the open circuit 
potential became more negative. This type of relationship has been observed for other 
binary alloy systems33*34 and demonstrates that the corrosion of the Al-Mg alloys was 
predominantly under cathodic control since the corrosion current became larger as the 
potential became more negative. 
DISCUSSION 
Barrier properties of coatings 
The cathodic polarization sweeps conducted on sputtered pure Al showed the type of 
highly polarized behaviour normally associated with corrosion reactions that are under 
diffusion control (Fig. 7). In the near neutral solutions employed in this study, the 
predominant cathodic reaction is considered to be oxygen reduction. The cathodic 
corrosion behaviour of the sputtered Al alloys was similar to that of pure Al even for 
those alloys containing high Mg levels. For example, the Al-55wt% Mg alloy behaved in a 
similar manner to pure Al in that diffusion control was predominant, rather than showing 
Aluminium-magnesium alloys 165 
0. 
Magnesium content (wtX1 
Fig. 8. The relationship between corrosion current density and magnesium content for unbalanced 
magnetron sputtered AI-Mg alloy coatings in aerated 600 mmol I-’ NaCl solution. 
the more active behaviour associated with pure magnesium where hydrogen evolution is 
often the principal cathodic process.3S37 
The cathodic polarization sweeps showed that the corrosion current density of pure Al 
was shifted to higher currents as the Mg level was raised (Figs 7 and 8). If the cathodic 
current was determined solely by the diffusion limited reduction of oxygen, then no effect of 
the nature of the cathode should be observed and the corrosion current should be 
independent of alloy composition. The fact that the currents were very different shows that 
the nature of the alloy surface was significant. The addition to aluminium of significant 
concentrations of magnesium would certainly be expected to change the nature of the 
passive surface film on Al. In the presence of moisture, Mg develops a thin film of 
magnesium hydroxide, Mg(OH)2, which is generally incomplete and provides only limited 
protection to magnesium. Thus the addition of sufficient concentrations of Mg to Al would 
be expected to disrupt the surface oxide film formed on Al and weaken its protective effect, 
possibly accounting for the poorer barrier properties of the Al-Mg binary alloys. The 
increase in the cathodic current that occurs as the magnesium content is raised may be 
related to the increased rate of oxygen diffusion through the less protective oxide film 
formed on the Al-Mg alloys. Mansfeld et a1.38 employed similar arguments to explain the 
difference in corrosion rates between aluminium alloys where none should be found since 
their corrosion reactions were under cathodic control. Mansfeld et al.38 also proposed that 
differences in efficiency for oxygen reduction on individual Al alloys themselves could also 
account for the observed difference in their corrosion rates. 
166 K.R. Baldwin et al 
Open-circuit potential (V vs SCEl 
Fig. 9. The relationship between corrosion current density and open circuit corrosion potential for 
unbalanced magnetron sputtered AI-Mg alloys determined after 1 h immersion in aerated 
600 mmol I-’ NaCl solution. Weight percentage magnesium content ofeach alloy shown in brackets. 
The barrier corrosion resistance of the Al coatings will not only be dependent on the rate 
at which they corrode but also the nature of the corrosion itself. In the neutral salt fog 
environment it was found that the corrosion of the Al and Al-Mg alloy coatings was 
characterized mainly by pitting attack. This type of localized attack is thought to result from 
the presence of flaws in the passive oxide film. In studies on pure Al coatings, Hinton et al.” 
proposed that if the local microstructure exhibited little or no porosity, attack occurred 
mainly by uniform penetration over a wide area, while some pitting was prevalent at grain 
boundaries. With as-plated ion-vapour deposited coatings, Hinton et al.” found that the 
local microstructure contained high levels of porosity, and was thus characterized mainly by 
localized pitting, leading to early exposure of the substrate. In the present work, the 
corrosion of the dense, non-porous sputtered Al alloys containing low Mg levels (< 15 wt%) 
was characterized by the formation of large pits similar in form to those observed for pure 
Al. The susceptibility of these coatings to pitting attack was demonstrated by the open 
circuit corrosion potential measurements which showed potential fluctuations which are 
typical of this type of localized attack. In contrast, those Al-Mg alloys containing higher 
Mg levels were less susceptible to pitting attack. A possible explanation is that the high Mg 
alloys were gradually assuming the characteristics of pure Mg for which a more uniform 
type of attack is often found.36337 This was supported by the open circuit potential 
measurements which showed a marked increase in electrochemical stability as the alloy Mg 
level was increased (Fig. 5). 
Aluminium-magnesium alloys 167 
For pure Al and the Al-Mg alloy coatings, the air-formed film will provide the first 
barrier against attack in the presence of an aggressive environment. In the presence of 
chloride ions, appreciable thinning of the oxide film is likely to occur, and eventually the 
underlying metallic layer will be exposed to the corrodant. The corrodant will penetrate pre- 
existing defects in the coating such as small pores, which will then behave as crevices. In the 
pores or in pits formed as a result of corrosion, the local environment will become 
increasingly acidic. In the case of pure Al, the development of local acidity will accelerate the 
dissolution of Al and thus stimulate pit growth.39 For the Al-Mg alloys, the development of 
strongly acidic conditions may lead to the dissolution of both Al and Mg. In the early stages 
of pit growth, hydrogen evolution would occur because of the limited oxygen supply and the 
low solubility of oxygen in solutions of high chloride concentration. lo Following this initial 
period, the pH in the pit is thought to rise as oxygen reduction becomes the predominant 
cathodic reaction thus generating hydroxyl ions. In the case of pure Al, hydroxides such as 
Al(OH)s, then precipitate in the pit, accompanied by the formation of other insoluble 
corrosion products such as Mg(OH)2 in the case of the Al-Mg alloys which may help to stifle 
corrosion activity. 
The sacrificialproperties of coatings 
The electrochemical potential of binary alloys is related to the thermodynamic 
equilibrium potentials of the two components of the alloy.40 The electrochemical potential 
adopted by the binary alloy will be located between the potential values of the parent metals. 
The potential of pure magnesium is approximately - 1.9 V (SCE) in 600 mmol 1-l chloride 
solution35-37 compared with a value of between -0.7 and - 1 .O V (SCE) for aluminium, 
depending upon its purity.‘5-18 Accordingly, the addition of Mg to the sputtered Al deposits 
produced alloys which adopted open circuit corrosion potentials that were negative to that 
of pure Al but were positive with respect to that of pure Mg (Fig. 6). 
Previous work at DRA Farnborough4i has shown that open circuit potential 
measurements can be a reliable guide in predicting the direction of current flow in a 
galvanic couple formed between metal coatings and steel although the magnitude of the 
current cannot be determined solely from potential data and must usually be determined 
experimentally. If the potential of the coating is negative to steel then sacrificial protection 
will be obtained whereas if it is more noble than the substrate, the steel will corrode 
preferentially. In the present work, the open circuit potential adopted by pure Al was close 
to that of bare steel which, as indicated above, adopts a potential of -0.67 V (SCE) 
600 mmol 1-l NaCl solution.16 Although pure Al is slightly negative to steel, it is possible 
that the coatings will be insufficiently active to drive the potential of the steel substrate well 
below its protection potential, accounting for the limited sacrificial protection afforded by 
the pure Al. The sputter deposited Al alloy coatings were found to become increasingly 
active as the magnesium content was raised, indicating that the coatings would afford 
improved sacrificial protection to steel over that obtained for pure Al. 
Figures 5 and 6 showed that alloying additions of 15 wt% Mg and above are required to 
obtain the significant negative shift in potential to ensure that steel would be effectively 
protected at any pre-existing pores or corrosion pits in the coating. If the magnesium level 
was increased significantly above this value, to over 30 wt% Mg, the potential of the alloys 
was found to decrease below - 1 .O V (SCE). Although Al-Mg alloys which adopt such 
active potentials would provide very effective sacrificial protection, it is likely that they 
would not be present for long since they are likely to suffer high rates of galvanic corrosion. 
168 K.R. Baldwin et al. 
Binary alloy systems composed of two metals with widely different electrochemical 
potentials are often susceptible to de-alloying. This occurs with, for example, some types of 
copper-zinc alloys (brasses) where the more active metal (Zn) selectively dissolves from the 
alloy matrix leaving a deposit enriched in the more noble metal (Cu). In simple terms, the Al 
alloys containing less than 50 wt% magnesium are analogous to the Cu-Zn alloys in that the 
more active metal (Mg) is contained in a matrix composed of the more noble metal (Al). An 
earlier study conducted at DRA Farnborough42 has shown that open circuit potential 
monitoring is useful in studying de-alloying since a significant positive shift in potential 
generally occurs as the more active component of the alloy is dissolved from the alloy 
surface. In the present work, the potential of the Al alloys containing less than 50 wt% Mg 
remained relatively stable despite the fluctuations in potential, suggesting that the Al-Mg 
alloys which were composed mainly of Al were resistant to de-alloying. 
The open circuit corrosion potential measurements conducted on the sputtered alloys 
composed mainly of Mg were found to behave differently to those composed mainly of Al. 
Fig. 5 shows that the potential of the Al-55 wt% Mg alloy increased sharply over the initial 
immersion period. In contrast to pure Al and the low-magnesium alloys which also showed 
initial rises in potential, the Al-55 wt% Mg alloy became increasingly noble and did not 
stabilise suggesting that it is susceptible to a form of de-alloying. A possible explanation is 
that magnesium was selectively dissolved leaving a surface enriched in the more noble 
aluminium, accounting for the noble shift in potential. Toward the end of the immersion 
period, the potential of the high-magnesium alloy did eventually show signs of stabilising, 
possibly as an equilibrium structure developed in the surface layers. 
Corrosion behaviour iiz neutral salt f5g 
In the neutral salt fog tests, it was found that the level of corrosion protection afforded to 
steel by the sputtered Al coatings increased sharply as the magnesium content was increased 
until a peak in performance was observed for alloys containing 20 wt% magnesium. Further 
increases in the magnesium content were of no further benefit and instead caused a decline in 
corrosion performance. The cathodic polarization sweeps showed that the corrosion current 
density of Al in 600 mmol l- ’ NaCl solution was increased as the Mg level was raised. The 
values obtained for Al alloys with Mg concentrations of up to approximately 20 wt% were 
lower than corrosion currents previously recorded for ion-vapour deposited pure Al,’ where 
the corrosion current density of the as-plated IVD coatings in aerated 600 mmol 1-l was 
found to be approximately 0.01 PA mm-‘, which is 10 times higher than that recorded in the 
present work for sputtered pure Al under very similar experimental conditions. The 
significantly higher corrosion current density found for the ion-vapour deposited 
aluminium coating is most likely due to its high porosity compared with the sputtered 
deposits evaluated in this study. Thus it may be concluded that although the addition of 
significant concentrations of Mg would have reduced the barrier corrosion protection 
afforded by the Al alloy sputtered deposits, they would remain more effective than 
conventional ion-plated aluminium coatings provided the Mg content does not exceed 
approximately 20 wt %. 
In the neutral salt fog environment, it is proposed that the initial increase in the level of 
corrosion protection observed in the neutral salt fog environment for alloys containing up to 
20 wt% magnesium was mainly due to an improvement in the level of sacrificial protection 
afforded by the sputtered deposits as the Mg concentration was increased. It has been shown 
that the loss of barrier properties would not have become a significant factor until the 
Aluminium-magnesium alloys 169 
magnesium content was relatively high ( > 20 wt% Mg). The decline in the level of corrosion 
protection afforded by the sputtered Al-Mg alloys (Fig. 2) when the magnesium level was 
increased above 20 wt% was most likely due to the combined effects of excessive rates of 
galvanic corrosion as the coatings became more active and the loss of barrier corrosion 
protection. Thus the data obtained in the present work suggest that the peak in performance 
observed in the neutral salt fog environment for the sputtered deposits containing 
approximately 20 wt% Mg represents an optimum balance being attained between the 
barrier and sacrificial properties of the Al-Mg alloy coatings. 
CONCLUSIONS 
1. Potentiodynamic cathodic polarization sweeps conducted on unbalanced mag- 
netron sputtered Al-Mg alloy coatings in 600mmol I-’ NaCl solution showed that the 
corrosion current density of the Al alloys increased as the Mg content was raised, 
indicating that the barrier corrosion resistance of sputtered Al will decline as the alloy 
Mg level is increased. 
2. From open circuit corrosion potential measurements conducted in 600 mmol l- ’ 
NaCl solution it was found that sputter deposited Al alloy coatings become progressively 
more active as the alloy Mg content is increased, suggesting that the Al alloys will become 
more sacrificial as the Mg level is raised. 
3. In neutral salt fog tests, the level of corrosion protection afforded by Al alloy coatings 
is improved by the addition of Mg until an optimum is reached for alloys containing 
approximately 20 wt% Mg. Further increases in the Mg level, above 20 wt%, caused a 
decline in performance. It is proposed that the peak in performance represents an optimum 
balance attained in the neutral salt fog environment between the barrier and sacrificial 
properties of the Al-Mg alloy coatings. 
REFERENCES 
I G.A. Capuano, R. Lafortune and C. Gobeil, Plating and Surface Finishing &I,49 (1977). 
2. R. Suchentrunk, Corrosion Protection by Electra-deposited Aluminium, AGARD Lecture Series 106, I. l-7.25 
(1980). 
3. W. Wittich. R. Suchentrunk and H. Kellerer, Metal1 und Technik 30, 943 (1980). 
4. M. Galova, Surf. Technol. 11, 357 (1980). 
5. S. Biallozor. A. Lisowska-Oleksiak and W.N. Titova, Surf Coat. Technol. 34, 549 (1988). 
6. W. Kautek, Corros. Sci. 28, I73 (1988). 
7. E. Fanin, AGARD Conf Proc., No. 256, Advanced Fabrication Processes, Florence, Italy, 2628 September 
(1978). 
8. M. El-Sherbiny and E. Salem, Anti-corrosion 28, 15 (1981). 
9. N.A.G. Ahmed, Anti-Corrosion 31, 4 (1984). 
10. B.R.W. Hinton, W.J. Pollock, P.N. Trathen and A. Crosky, Corros. Australasia 13, 12 (1987). 
11. R. Palmer and D.J. Hall, Product Finishing 45, 6 (1992). 
12. B.T. Nevill, Plating Surf Finishing 80, 14 (1993). 
13. J.F. McIntyre and L. Hang, Corrosion 50, 26 (1994). 
14. J.C. Salvador Fernandes and M.G.S. Ferreira, Surf Coat. Technol. 53, 99 (1992). 
15. W.H. Ailor, Proc. ConfI Corrosion ‘70, Paper No. 36, p. 200. Philadelphia (1970). 
16. C.J.E. Smith and K.R. Baldwin, Product Finishing 45, 12 (1992). 
17. T.D. Burleigh, R.C. Rennick and F.S. Bovard, Corrosion 49, 683 (1993). 
18. K.R. Baldwin and C.J.E. Smith, Proc. Co@ Materials Technology ‘91 (ed. A. Niku-Lari), p. 153. IITT- 
Technology Transfer International, Paris, September (1991). 
170 K.R. Baldwin et al. 
19. D.P. Monaghan. D.G. Teer, P.A. Logan, K.C. Laing, R.I. Bates and R.D. Amell, Surf. Coat. Technol. 60, 
592 (1993). 
20. P.L. Lane and C.J.E. Smith, Surface Engineering Practise (ed. K.N. Strafford, P.K. Datta and J.S. Gray), 
p. 566. Ellis-Horwood Ltd., Chichester (1990). 
21. J.B. Horton, Corrosion Control by Coatings (ed. H. Leidheiser), Science Press, p. 59. Princeton (1979). 
22. V.C.R. McLaughlin. AGARD Cant Proc.. No. 256, Advanced Fabrication Processes, Florence, Italy, 2628 
September (1978). 
23. B. Window and N. Savvides, J. Var. Sri. Technol. A4, 196 (1986). 
24. B. Window and N. Savvides, J. Var. Sci. Technol. A4, 453 (1986). 
25. B. Window and N. Savvides, J. Var. Sri. Technol. A4, 504 (1986). 
26. ASTM B117. Standard Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing, American Society for Testing and Materials, 
Philadelphia (198 1). 
27. M. Janik-Czachor, G.C. Wood and G.E. Thompson, Br. Corros. J. 15, 154 (1980). 
28. B. Samuels, K. Sotoudeh and R.T. Foley, Corrosion 37, 92 (1981). 
29. R.T. Foley, Corrosion 42, 277 (1986). 
30. K. Nisancioglu and H. Holtan, Werkstoffe und Korrosion 30, 105 (1979). 
31. M.G. Fontana and N.D. Greene, Corros. Eng. Ch. 9. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York (1967). 
32. F. Mansfeld, Electrochemical Techniques for Corrosion (ed. R. Baboian), p. 18. NACE (1977). 
33. K.R. Baldwin, M.J. Robinson and C.J.E. Smith, Corros. Sri. 36, 1115 (1994). 
34. N.R. Short, A. Abibsi and J.K. Dennis, Trans. Inst. Met. Finishing 67, 73 (1991). 
35. F. Hehmann, F. Sommer, H. Jones and R.G.J. Edyvean, J. Mar. Sci. 24, 2369 (1989). 
36. G.L. Makar and J. Kruger, J. electrochem. Sot. 137, 414 (1990). 
37. G.L. Makar, J. Kruger and K. Sieradzki. J. electrochem. Sot. 139, 47 (1992). 
38. F. Mansfeld, D.H. Hengstenberg and J.V. Kenkel, Corrosion 30, 343 (1974). 
39. M. Pourbaix, Atlas of Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solutions, Section 5.1. 2nd Edition. NACE; 
Cebelcor (1974). 
40. H. Kaiser, Corrosion Mechanisms (ed. F. Mansfeld), p. 85. Marcel Dekker Inc. (1987). 
41. K.R. Baldwin, M.J. Robinson and C.J.E. Smith. Br. Corrosion J. 29, 299 (1994). 
42. K.R. Baldwin, M.J. Robinson and C.J.E. Smith. Corros. Sci. 35, 1267 (1993). 
