Vacuum/volume 47lnumbers 6-8/pages 1035 to 1038t1996 
Copyright 0 1996 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved Pergamon 
PII: SOO42-207X(96300119-4 0042-207X/56 $15.00+.00 
Computational simulations on electron orbits in the 
magnetron sputtering plasmas 
Shunji Ido and Kosuke Nakamura, Department of Functional Materials Science, faculty of Engineering, 
Saitama University, 255 Shimo-Okubo, Urawa, Saitama 338, Japan 
Three-dimensional particle orbit simulations are carried out to analyze the electron orbits in a magnetron 
sputtering system. Collisions between electrons and neutral Ar gas atoms are included using the Monte-Carlo 
method. Ionization points are related to the plasma generation points and approximate the distribution of 
plasmas in the magnetron sputtering system. The profiles of plasma distribution correspond to the shape of 
the magnetic field. The increase of ionization points is obtained by increasing the glow discharge voltage. 
Copyright 0 1996 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. 
Introduction 
The characteristics of a magnetron sputtering system is to trap 
electrons in a magnetic field so that it maintains the plasma state 
at low voltage.’ The electrons trapped by the magnetic field will 
ionize the neutral particles by collisions. The positive ions in 
plasmas are accelerated toward the target by the electric field. The 
result of bombardment against the target causes the sputtering. 
Sputtered atoms are deposited on the substrate to form the thin 
films. This is the process of sputtering in the magnetron sputtering 
system. 
The distribution of plasmas mostly depends on the geometry 
of magnetic fields. To design the sputtering system effectively, 
analysis of the relation between plasmas and magnetic fields is 
necessary. Simulations are carried out to trace the electron orbits 
with collisions to examine the distribution of plasmas. 
In the previous studies, simulations were carried out to examine 
the electron orbits without collisions in the magnetron sputtering 
system.’ By considering the collision effects,3 the authors 
developed a simulation code to trace an electron orbit including 
the collisions between an electron and neutral atoms”’ in the 
magnetron sputtering system. By examining the distribution ol 
ionization collision points, the shape of plasmas and the erosion 
profiles were studied. A compressed magnetic field-magnetron 
sputtering system was proposed by Hata’~” and also studied by us 
experimentally” and computationally.5~7 These types of particle 
simulation were applied in computational and experimental studies 
to analyze the features of magnetron sputtering systems.“m’5 
In the present paper, the authors will discuss the availability 
of control of magnetic fields in the reference system of rectangular 
magnetron, and the effect of control of the glow discharge volt- 
age. 
Calculation model 
Magnetron sputtering system. Figure 1 shows the schematic of 
the reference model of a compressed magnetic field-magnetron sputtering system.“~” The shape of magnetic field on the target 
can be modified by changing the current in the compressing coil. 
Figure 2 shows the configuration of rectangular permanent 
magnets in the reference calculation model. The electric field is 
formed between the anode and the cathode by applying dc volt- 
age. The anode has a role as a substrate in formation of the thin 
film. The cathode is a target which consists of thin film material 
to be sputtered. 
Basic equation. Two basic equations shown below are used to 
obtain the electron orbits. 
m~=y(E+vxB)+1;:,., (1) 
dX 
dr = !’ (2) 
where E (V/m) is the vector of electric field, 5 (T) is the vector of 
magnetic flux density, 11 (m/s) is the velocity vector, X (m) is the 
I I I Electric field 
Magnetv Coil 1 
Figure 1. Schematics of a rectangular magnetron sputtering system 
1035 
S/do and K Nakamura: Computational simulations of electron orbits 
b’l 
I- E 
E 
0 
m 
Pi 
1 I- ~----__--_- 3 II 0 111 m--- . 
Figure 2. Configuration of permanent magnets. a’ - 
-IL 2 0 mm 
t 
vector of position, I (s) is time, q (C) is the electric charge of a 
particle, and m (kg) is the mass of a charged particle. Equation 
(I) is the equation of motion, which includes Coulomb force and 
Lorentz force. The other, eqn (2) is the definition of velocity. To 
solve the two equations, we used the Runge-Kutta-Gill method. 
The collision term can be described as follows: 
where Av is the change of the velocity vector due to the collision 
and At is the time interval between collisions. In the present 
calculations, three types of collision are considerd, namely an 
ionization collision, an excitation collision and an elastic colli- 
sion. In the present model, energy losses due to the collision are 
fixed as 15.8 eV in an ionization collision and 11.6 eV in an 
excitation collision. No energy loss occurs in an elastic collision. 
The Monte-Carlo method was used to calculate the collision 
term.J ’ 
Magnetic field. The magnetic field is calculated using the magnetic 
Coulomb’s law for the magnet and Biot Savart’s law for the 
compressing coils. These are shown below. 
Am is the magnetic charge on a magnet. AB, (T) is the vector of 
magnetic flux density generated by Am at the position of r (m). I 
(A) is the current in a coil. pO represents the permeabilty of 
vacuum. r (m) is the distance from the position of the As (m) of 
the coil. 
Figures 3(a) and (b) show the lines of magnetic force as the 
profile along the cross section line o-a’ shown in Figure 2. In 
Figure 3(a), by the positive coil current, the magnetic field is 
compressed toward the inside, which is called an inward com- 
pressed case. In Figure 3(b), the Imagnetic field is expanded 
towards the outside by the negative coil current, which is called 
an outward expanded case. 
1036 (a) 
(b) X --Ax i s 
X--Axi s 
Figure 3. Calculation results of lines of magnetic force in a magnetron 
sputtering system: (a) inward compressed model and (b) outward 
expanded model. 
Electric field. The electric field is assumed to have only a Z- 
component. Therefore, the electric potential V is a function of 
the :-component. The potential of the anode is zero, thus the 
potential of the cathode has a value of -400 V. The numerical 
approximation is shown in Figure 4 with the experimental 
Calculated data 
0 Experimental data 
z 1 m 1 [xl0 ‘1 
Figure 4. Numerical model and experimental results of electric field in a 
magnetron plasma. 
S /do and K Nakamura: Computational simulations of electron orbits 
z 
X 
Figure 5. Electron orbit with collisions in a magnetron sputtering system 
results.” The solid line shows the numerical approximation and 
the solid circles show the experimental data. In Figure 4, the 
rapid drop ofthe potential is seen near the surface of the cathode. 
it is assumed that the potential profile is not dependent on the 
gas pressure. And it is also assumed that the thickness of the 
sheath is constant.‘” 
Orbits of electrons. The electron orbits are obtained by solving 
eqns ( I) and (2). using the RungeeKuttaaGill method and the 
Monte-Carlo method for the collision term. Figure 5 shows the 
calculated result of the electron orbit in a magnetron sputtering 
system. The solid circles represent the collision points. The elec- 
tron moves spirally along the line of magnetic force during the 
time interval between collisions. Then the electron is reflected by 
the potential and the magnetic mirror, The electron drift motions 
such as an Lx B drift can be seen in the azimuthal direction. 
Results and discussion 
The distribution of ionization points. In the simulations. electrons 
are traced to obtain the points where ionization collision between 
electron and Ar gas atom occurs. Those points are called ion- 
ization points in the present paper. The profiles of distribution 
of ionization points are assumed to approximate the profiles of 
density of plasma. Figure 6 shows the profiles of distribution of 
ionization points in the zone near the o-a’ cross section of Figure 
2. In Figure 6(a). calculations are carried out using the inward 
compressed model of magnetic field shown in Figure 3(a). On the 
other hand. Figure 6(b) corresponds to the results obtained using 
the outward expanded model of magnetic field shown in Figure 
3(b). In the denser area. there are many ionization collisions with 
neutral atoms. It is assumed that the dense area corresponds to 
the dense area of plasmas in a magnetron. 
As shown in Figure 6, the distribution of ionization points will 
correspond to the configuration of magnetic fields, resulting in 
the good control of the position of dense regions of ionization 
points. 
Electric field control. Calculations are carried out to examine the 
effects of the electric field. We assume that the potentials of the 
sheath edge and the plasmas are not dependent on the discharge 
voltage. and the thickness of the sheath is constant. By changing 
the potential of the cathode, we control the electric field. Figure 
7 shows the relation between the number of electrons and the 
number of ionization points corresponding to the variation of Figure 6. Profile of distribution of lonkttion points. (a) inward com- 
pressed model and tb) outwad expanded model 
the discharge voltage. The discharge voltage we take is 350 V. 
400 V and 450 V. As the discharge voltage increases, the number 
of ionization points increases. This result means that, when the 
discharge voltage becomes higher. the distribution of the plasmas 
becomes larger, and the density of the plasmas becomes larger. 
,x,o’] 1 ’ ’ 7 
Lo 151 0 : 350 v 
‘c I : 400 v 
0 I A a : 450 v 1 
* 
A 0 
. l 
Number of electrcns [Xl (I’] 
Figure 7. Calculated results of the number ol ionitation points as il 
function ofthe number ofelectrons when the cathode voltages were ~ 350 
V. -400 V. and -450 V. 
1037 
S /do and K Nakamura: Computational simulations of electron orbits 
The energy of the ion which sputters the target surface becomes 
higher when the discharge voltage becomes higher. Therefore, 
higher glow discharge voltage causes deeper and wider erosion. 
Conclusions 
By tracing the electron orbits, ionization points are obtained. By 
estimating ionization points as plasma generation points, we 
can approximate the profile of distribution of plasmas in the 
magnetron sputtering system. As the glow discharge voltage 
becomes higher, the distribution of the plasmas becomes larger 
and the density of the plasmas becomes larger. 
References 
’ K Wasa and S Hayakawa, Sparta G(i),utsu (Sputter Technique). Kyoritsu 
Syuppan, Tokyo (1988) (in Japanese). 
‘S Ido and K Sakamoto, Proc of the Second Japanese-Polish Joint Sem- 
inur on Electromagnetic Phenomena in Materialsand Computational Tech- 
niques. Ohita, 1991, p 427. “T E Sheridan, M J Goeckner and J Goree, J Vuc Sci Tech&, A8, 30 
( 1990). 
“S Ido and K Sakamoto, Kakuyugo Kenkyu, 68,386 (1992) (in Japanese). 
‘S Ido and K Nakamura, Jpn J Appl Phyx. 32, 5698 (1993). 
‘S Ido, K Nakamura and S Noguchi, Journal qf Plasma und Fusion 
Research, 69, 1224 (1993) (in Japanese). 
7M Miyagi, K Nakamura and S Jdo, Pror of’ the 12th Symposium on 
Plasma Processing, Sendai, 1995, p 293. 
‘K Nakamura and S Ido, Proc of’ the 3rd International Symposium on 
Sputtering and Plasmu Processes. Tokyo, 1995, p 173. 
‘T Hata, F Takeda. 0 Morimoto, E Noda and T Hada, Jpn J Appl Phys, 
20, 145 (1981). 
‘OT Hata, J Kawahara and K Toriyama, Jpn J Appl Phq’s, 22, 505 (1983). 
” T Hata and Y Kamide, J Vat Sci Technol. A5, 2 I54 (1987). 
“S Ido, Y Ishida and K Hijikata, Jpn J &pi Phys, 32, 2112 (1993). 
“E Shidoji M Nemoto. T Nomura and Y Yoshikawa, Jpn J Appl Phys, 
33, 4281 (i994). 
“‘T Kobayashi, K Itagaki, T Uchiyama, T Tsukada and N Hosokawa, 
Pmc of the 3rd International Symposium on Sputtering and Plasma 
Processes, Tokyo, 1995, p 23. 
“M Kamei. Proc of‘ the 3rd International Symplsium on Sputtering and 
Plasma Processes, Tokyo, 1995, p 187. 
