cm __ Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B 119 (1996) 30-41 
ELSEVlER Beam Inteactloes 
with Materials A Atoms 
On the role of classical and quantum notions in channeling 
and the development of fast positrons as a solid state probe 
of valence electron and spin densities 
Lene Vestergaard Hau a7c’ * , J.A. Golovchenko a*c, R. Haakenaasen b*d, A.W. Hunt ‘, 
J.P. Peng d, P. Asoka-&mar d, KG. Lynn d, M. Weinert d, J.C. Palathingal e 
a Rowland Institute for Science, Edwin H. Lund Boulevard, Cambridge, MA OZI42, USA 
b Department of Physics, Universiry of Oslo, Oslo. Norway 
’ Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA 
d Department of Physics, Brookhaven Nutional Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA 
’ Department of Physics. University of Puerto Rico, Mayogue:. Puerto Rico 00680 
Received 24 November 199.5; revised form received 3 April 1996 
Abstract 
The subtleties of the interplay between classical and quantum pictures are revealed particularly clearly in connection with 
the effect of channeling. The role of this interplay is described and related to a new probe for valence electron and spin 
magnetic densities in thin films, which is based upon two-photon annihilation in flight of channeled MeV positrons. The 
channeling effect is used to steer positrons into the interstices of a crystal, where the valence electron density is high. 
Transmission measurements have been performed to test our quantitative understanding of the spatial and momentum 
distribution of channeled positrons. We calculate annihilation rates in a gold crystal and show that the probe is highly 
sensitive to valence electrons. Channeling states in iron are shown to be sensitive to different regions of the spin magnetic 
density. With a polarized beam of MeV positrons and the possibility for selective state population, we show that the spatial 
distribution of the magnetization density can be probed. 
1. Introduction to channeling 
In recent years, a significant interest in studies of 
fundamental quantum effects has created a desire for con- 
structing wave guides for de Broglie matter waves [l-4]. 
These guides act as transport systems and result in trans- 
verse motion, that is stably bound in a confining two-di- 
mensional potential, and in a free longitudinal motion, 
along the length of the structure. The bound states in the 
guide offer very direct evidence of quantum interference of 
de Broglie waves since the sharpness of energy levels 
associated with the states is a result of wave interference, 
similar to the frequency selection in a high-quality interfer- 
ometer. To propagate microwaves, for example, a special 
wave guide is required and, similarly, de Broglie waves, 
associated with atoms, cooled to temperatures of a few 
microkelvin with the new techniques of laser cooling [51, 
need special guiding structures. 
* Corresponding author. E-mail: hau@risvax.rowland.org; Fax: 
+ 1 617 4974627. For de Broglie waves, associated with electrons and 
positrons of a few MeV, a wave guide is created in the 
strong electric field in the proximity of atomic strings in 
single crystals. The motion of high energy, charged parti- 
cles, penetrating a crystal at small angles with an atomic 
axis, is governed by the continuum potential obtained as an 
average of the crystal potential along the atomic string (z) 
direction, 
where d is the interatomic spacing for atoms on the 
string. The three examples of wave structures represent a 
large span in scales and wavelengths: microwaves, with 
cm wavelengths, propagate in macroscopic structures 
whereas microkelvin cold atoms, with wavelengths on the 
order of 1000 A, require mesoscopic structures, based on 
micron sized wires, for their propagation. MeV electrons 
and positrons have wavelengths (connected with transverse 
motion) on the order of I A which matches the size of the 
crystalline wave guides. 
0168-583X/96/$15.00 Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science J3.V. All rights reserved 
PII SO168-583X(96)00307-2 
L.V. Hau et al./Nucl. Insrr. and Merh. in Phys. Res. B I19 (1996) 30-41 31 
The theoretical foundation for crystalline guiding - or 
‘channeling’ - is contained in the papers by Lindhard 
[6.7]. For channeling corresponding to bound motion in the 
continuum potential, incidence angles of the charged parti- 
cles must be smaller than the angle 
(2) 
where U, is the height of the continuum potential, and 
p and u are particle momentum and velocity. This critical 
angle for channeling is valid for both positively and nega- 
tively charged particles. In [6], an alternative angle, 8,, 
was introduced as a result of an investigation of the 
validity of the continuum potential. The requirement, that 
many atoms on a string contribute to the scattering of an 
incident particle even at the distance of closest approach, 
leads to the requirement that incidence angles be smaller 
than 
where Z,e is the charge of the incoming particle and 
Z, the atomic number of target atoms. This analysis ap- 
plies to positively charged, channeled particles, and the 
two critical angles are typically of the same order of 
magnitude. 
The guiding effect for heavy ions of a few MeV has 
turned into a standard tool for investigation of crystal 
quality and defect locations [8]. However, the intellectually 
most intriguing aspect of the channeling effect is its illus- 
tration of the subtle interplay between classical orbital and 
quantum mechanical pictures. As an example of this inter- 
play, we consider scattering of a charged particle on an 
atomic string [6,9], which results from the combined scat- 
tering on many atoms. For scattering on one of these 
atoms. a classical description breaks down in the limit of 
large velocities. This is a well known fact which might at 
first seem surprising since the de Broglie wavelength, h, is 
inversely proportional to the velocity and hence large 
velocities correspond to small de Broglie wavelengths. 
However, this wavelength must be compared to a charac- 
teristic length in the scattering problem: a natural length is 
the collisional diameter, b, which is inversely proportional 
to the inverse square of the velocity. Thus, a classical 
orbital picture requires 
b 2Z,Z,e2 
K=-==>>l 
x hV 
where the parameter K was introduced by Bohr [lo]. We 
have used a collisional diameter corresponding to un- 
screened Coulomb scattering between two charges Z, e and 
Z,e. As seen from Eq. (4), an impact parameter descrip- 
tion breaks down for large velocities. For scattering on an atomic string, however, the classi- 
cal orbital picture is valid in the large velocity limit. This 
statement does not represent an inconsistency with the 
above argument since the scattering on a string is due to a 
series of correlated scattering events - whether or not the 
scattering angle is well defined at large distances in each 
single scattering event is immaterial. The relevant issue is 
the amount of spreading of a transverse wave packet over 
one interatomic spacing along the atomic swing. For a 
wave packet. centered around a momentum corresponding 
to the reduced wavelength, X, this spreading is G. and 
we conclude that the classical orbital picture is indeed 
approached for large velocities. 
As in the case of single atom scattering, we can intro- 
duce a kappa parameter for scattering on an atomic string 
described by a continuum potential. This potential, corre- 
sponding to a smearing of the charge distribution in the 
string direction, is exact in the limit of large velocities 
(which may be seen by a simple argument: cutting each 
atom along the string in halves and placing the pieces at 
half the interatomic distance is equivalent to increasing the 
velocity by a factor of two) [6]. For string scattering, the 
kappa parameter is inversely proportional to the transverse 
velocity ~0, where 0 is the angle of incidence with respect 
to the atomic axis, and the requirement for the validity of a 
classical orbital picture for the transverse motion of a 
channeled particle is 
2Z,Z,e” a 
KtGIII =--% 1. 
five d 
Here u is the screening length in a simple Thomas- 
Fermi estimate for the continuum string potential. By 
inserting the critical angle 6, into Eq. (5). we conclude 
that this requirement is fulfilled for all particles with 
masses large compared to the electron rest mass. For 
highly relativistic electrons and positrons with energies of 
GeV a classical description would apply whereas a quan- 
tum mechanical treatment of string scattering is required 
for electrons and positrons of a few MeV as considered in 
this paper. 
At this point it should be stressed that statements about 
the applicability of classical mechanics are not absolute 
statements but depend on the quantity under consideration. 
Eqs. (4) and (5) govern the applicability of classical me- 
chanics in the determination of scattering angles at large 
distances in single-atom and single-string scattering. For 
scattering on an array of strings, however, a number of 
classical paths could give rise to the same scattering angle 
and a prediction of the final result of the scattering process 
involves an addition of the amplitudes associated with the 
different paths. This gives rise to interference and diffrac- 
tion effects even in cases where scattering on a single 
string is classical. Diffraction is associated with events in 
which the recoil momentum in the scattering process is 
taken up by the crystal as a whole, as a non-local, phonon 
32 L.V. Hau et al./NucI. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Rex B II9 (1996130-41 
excitation. If a local excitation is involved, as in close 
encounter processes associated with large angle scattering, 
interference effects disappear since scattering on different 
atoms leads to distinctly different final states. These con- 
siderations are relevant for our transmission scattering 
experiments reported below. Also described in this paper is 
spin density probing in iron where the d electrons give rise 
to a net magnetization. Quantum tunneling into classically 
forbidden regions of the non-localized d orbitals could be 
the main contribution to our annihilation signals to be 
probed, even in cases where the kappa parameter for single 
string scattering is large. 
Scattering by strings of atoms has been used to study 
impact parameter dependence of atomic ionization pro- 
cesses in situations where a classical impact parameter 
description would be impossible for scattering on a single 
atom [11,12]. 
The quantized nature of the motion of channeled elec- 
trons of a few MeV has been beautifully revealed through 
channeling radiation spectroscopy [ 13,141. (In this case the 
quantized nature of the problem is revealed through the 
number of bound states in phase space rather than from 
values of the kappa parameter). The bound states for the 
DISTANCE FROM STRING r(i) transverse motion are found as eigenstates for a transverse 
Hamiltonian, 
-2 
H,= PI 
- + U(F), 
2v (6) 
where y is the relativistic gamma factor. 
The continuum potential for channeling of electrons 
along the < 111 > axis in silicon is shown in Fig. la 
together with the quantized levels corresponding to an 
electron energy of 3.5 MeV 1151. Channeled electrons will 
be tightly confined around atomic strings and for low lying 
levels, the continuum potential can be approximated by a 
single string potential with rotational symmetry. Hence we 
can label the states as Is, 2s, 2p, etc., according to the 
quantum number for orbital angular momentum projected 
onto the string direction. Fig. lb contains an experimental 
radiation spectrum emitted by 3.5 MeV electrons chan- 
neled along the < 111 > axis in silicon [IS]. The spec- 
trum was obtained by placing a solid state detector in the 
forward beam direction. Clearly, superimposed on the I/W 
incoherent bremsstrahlung spectrum is a line spectrum 
which corresponds to transitions between the quantized 
W 3000 IO‘ m 
ENERGY (keV) 
Fig. 1. (a) Continuum potential for the < 111 > -axial wave guide in silicon. We show the potential, thermally averaged over lattice 
vibrations, for three different crystal temperatures together with the quantized states corresponding to an electron energy of 3.5 MeV. The 
single string potential is rotationally symmetric and we can label the deeply bound channeling states according to their angular momentum 
quantum number, (b) Radiation spectra for 3.5 MeV electrons channeled along the < 111 > axis in a 5600 a thick silicon crystal. The 
spectra were obtained with a lithium doped silicon detector placed in the forward beam direction. The quantized structure of the 
two-dimensional bound motion in the crystalline wave guide is clearly revealed through the line spectrum superimposed on the l/o 
incoherent bremsstrahlung background. 
L.V. Hau er al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 119 11996) 30-41 
levels of Fig. la. Typical level spacings are on the order of 
10 eV, and the Lorentz boost of radiation energies into the 
keV region is due to a recoil effect for the radiating, 
relativistic electron. The energy of the emitted photon is 
supplied mainly from the energy ‘reservoir’ associated 
with the longitudinal, relativistic motion. 
Channeling radiation spectroscopy has been developed 
[ 16,171 and successfully applied to obtain very precise 
values for solid state parameters such as thermal vibra- 
tional amplitudes [18]. It is also possible to obtain vibra- 
tional correlation coefficients from linewidths of planar 
channeling lines [16]. Planar channeling refers to one-di- 
mensional, bound motion in a planar continuum potential 
obtained from the crystal potential by averaging over 
planar directions. This description is applicable for charged 
particles incident at small angles with atomic planes in the 
crystal and far from atomic string directions. 
Our aim here is to measure valence electron and spin 
magnetic densities in thin magnetic films with channeled 
MeV positrons. These positively charged particles will be 
guided into the interstices of the crystal and will hence be 
particularly sensitive to the presence of valence electrons. 
In our density studies, we shall combine the channeling 
effect with the process of two-photon annihilation in flight 
of positrons, which acts as a localized probe of the electron 
density. 
2. Transmission channeling experiments 
We have performed preliminary experiments with 1 
MeV positrons in single crystals of silicon, where the 
transmission of channeled particles is measured in the 
forward beam direction as a function of incidence angle to 
atomic planes [19]. With these experiments, we test our 
quantitative understanding of the transverse spatial and 
momentum distribution of channeled positrons as a func- 
tion of penetration depth into the crystal, which is of 
decisive importance in extracting information on valence 
electron and spin densities from our planned annihilation 
in flight measurements. The experiments were performed 
at the newly developed, intense, energy-tunable positron 
source at Brookhaven National Laboratory, which was 
constructed in the search for the illusive X0 particle [20]. 
A source of sodium 22, which is a beta+ emitter with an 
endpoint energy of 546 keV, has been placed in the high 
voltage terminal of a dynamitron accelerator. The energy 
can be tuned from 1 to 2.5 MeV with a resolution of 1 keV 
and a flux of lo5 positrons per second is obtained within 
an angular cone of one degree. 
To measure the transmitted flux through a 2700 A 
silicon crystal, a germanium detector is placed in the 
forward beam direction. The detector opening angle is 0.2” 
which ensures that only the direct, zeroth order Bragg 
beam is recorded. Furthermore, the detector opening angle 
is smaller than the critical angles associated with the bl - zec- 
Fig. 2. Forward transmitted yield of channeled I MeV positrons as 
a function of incidence angle with the (lOO), (1 IO), and (Ill) 
planes in a 2700 A thick single crystal of silicon. The stippled 
lines connect the experimental data points obtained with a germa- 
nium detector with an opening angle of 0.2”. This angle is small 
enough that all Bragg diffraction spots (except the zero-order one) 
escape the detector. The solid lines are theoretical predictions 
based upon the many beam method. This description includes 
dynamical diffraction effects which are. subsequently averaged 
over variations in crystal thickness across Ihe beam spot. 
atomic planes used for the channeling experiments (Eq. (2) 
gives critical angles 0, = 0.22” for the (100) plane, 0.30’ 
for (1 IO), and 0.3 1’ for the (111) plane). The measured 
transmission as a function of angle is shown in Fig. 2 
where the angles are in units of Bragg angles (Ba = 0.184”, 
0.130”, and 0.080”. respectively). Also shown in the figure 
is a theoretical curve obtained with the ‘many beam 
method’ as described below. Both the overall yield enve- 
lope and the fine structure, including the pronounced dips 
at the Bragg conditions, are well accounted for in our 
calculations. The positions of the Bragg dips may be 
obtained from diffraction kinematics whereas dynamical 
diffraction theory is necessary for evaluation of the magni- 
34 L.V. Hau et al./ Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Rex. B I19 (1996130-41 
tude of the yield. The fine structure is due to a beating 
between eigenstates with different energies, populated at 
the entrance surface of the crystal. Pendellosung-beating- 
lengths are on the order of loo0 A and the fine structure is 
sensitive to crystal thickness changes of IO-100 A. The 
theoretical curves have been averaged over the variation in 
crystal thickness across the beam spot on the crystal, 
which amounts to - 500 .& for a beam diameter of 1.4 
mm. The agreement of our theoretical predictions with the 
experimental data gives us confidence that we can quanti- 
tatively describe the transverse flux distribution of chan- 
neled positrons as they penetrate the crystal. 
While the presence of Bragg dips is clearly a quantum 
mechanical effect, one might expect that the overall enve- 
1 
0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
E 
F 0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 lope function could be obtained from classical considera- 
tions. We have investigated this and found that the experi- 
mental envelope is well approximated by the classical 
envelope function obtained for a detector opening angle 
equal to twice the Bragg angle. However, quantum me- 
chanically the transmission yield would not change for any 
change in the detector opening angle, which is less than 
twice the Bragg angle, whereas classically a continuous 
dependence of opening angle is obtained. 
We have calculated the classical envelope in two cases 
- one for a detector opening angle equal to twice the 
Bragg angle and one where the opening angle equals one 
fifth of the Bragg angle. These curves are shown in Fig. 3 
and, as seen, the yield is different in the two cases by 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
Incidence Angle O/O,, ( > a 
3. Classical functions for forward transmitted of 1 positrons channeled the (11 plane in with 
detector angles of = 0.16” and 0,/5 0.016” (b). (a) agrees with the obtained envelope Fig. 
2c. 
L.V. Hau et aI./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B I19 (1996) 30-41 35 
about an order of magnitude. A correct envelope function 
is obtained from a classical calculation only by introducing 
a distinct quantum mechanical quantity, the Bragg angle, 
into the theory. For the present experiment, where the 
detector opening angle is of the order of the Bragg angle, 
our conclusion is that the experimental envelope function 
cannot be obtained within a purely classical theory. How- 
ever, for large, detector angles, spanning many Bragg 
angles, a classical theory is applicable. 
The classical envelope functions shown in Fig. 3 are 
obtained by approximating the continuum potential with a 
harmonic potential. The transmission into the detector is 
calculated by integrating the probability distribution of exit 
angles for a given incidence angle, P(6,,,1@,,), over the 
detector opening angle A, 
Yield = JdB-,,ilP( O,,i,lOi,). i (7) 
This probability distribution is given as the product 
“(%,,I%) =/dE_P(H,,,,lEI)P(E,le,,), (8) 
where P (E,le,,) is the probability distribution of 
transverse energies for a given incidence angle, obtained by assuming a uniform spatial distribution of positrons as 
they reach the front crystal surface. 
(9) 
Furthermore, P(O,,,\ E, ) is the distribution function 
for exit angles for a given transverse energy, which is 
obtained from the microcanonical ensemble under an as- 
sumption of statistical equilibrium in the available phase 
space. 
PC LJE,) Or /& . (10) 
Note that the factor of proportionality in ECq. (IO) 
depends on the transverse energy. 
3. Valence electron densities 
To probe valence electron densities, we utilize the 
guiding effect of channeling to steer positrons into regions 
of the crystal with a high concentration of valence elec- 
trons. We combine this effect with the process of two-pho- 
357 Annihilation Rate vs. Incidence Angle 
Random Even1 Rate - 
0 ~~~l~~~l~~~l~,~t~~~l’~~I~“I~ 
0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2 2.4 2.0 
Incidence Angle (degrees) 
Fig. 4. Two-photon annihilation in-flight rate calculated as a function of incidence angle for I MeV positrons channeled along the < 110 > 
axis in a 6000 A gold crystal. The angle to the (100) plane is IO” Also indicated on the figure is the random rate obtained with a uniform 
positron flux distribution. 
36 L.V. Hau et al. / Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B I I9 (1996) 30-41 
Electron Density in Transverse Unit Cell 
4 
3.5 
3 
2.5 
2 y (A) 
1.5 
1 
0.5 
0 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 
x (A) 
Fig. 5. Contour plot of the electron distribution in gold, shown in the plane perpendicular to the < I IO > axis. The density is obtained from 
density functional methods and is averaged along the < 110 > direction. 
ton annihilation in flight which acts as a probe of the local 
electron density. The calculated annihilation rate for 1 
MeV psitrons channeled along the < 110 > axis in a 
6000 A gold crystal as a function of incidence angle is 
shown in Fig. 4. The annihilation rate is given as a 
product, 
Annihilation rate = @a / ‘d z overlap, (11) 0 
of the positron flux @= IO5 per second, the annihilation 
cross section u= (e2/m~2)2 for MeV positrons annihilat- 
ing with electrons at rest, and the transverse overlap 
integral integrated over crystal thickness T, 
Overlap = /I q ( r’, z)l’n,( 7, z)dr’. (‘2) 
Here, I$/*(?, z> is the positron probability density at 
penetration depth z into the crystal, and n,(r’, z> the 
electron density in the crystal, which is obtained from 
density functional methods based on augmented plane 
wave expansions [21]. A contour plot of the electron 
density is shown in Fig. 5. 
The transverse positron wavefunction, $, is expanded 
in eigenstates for the transverse Hamiltonian (6), where the 
continuum potential U(r) is periodic. Hence the eigen- 
states can be chosen as two-dimensional Bloch states that 
are subsequently expanded in plane waves (the ‘many 
beam method’). The transverse &h&linger equation is 
then transformed into an algebraic eigenvalue equation and 
in Fig. 6 we show the Bloch bands in an extended zone 
scheme along a line which is at an angle of IO” to the 
(100) plane. In Fig. 4, the annihilation rate is seen to increase with 
increasing angle to the atomic string. This is due to the fact 
that for larger angles, the positron penetrates into the 
Energy Bands for 1 MeV Positrons in Gold <l lO> 
26 
24 
22 
I / 
I 
18 
16 
14 
12 i -I 
10 
8 
-1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 
Reciprocal Lattice Vector (I/A> 
Fig. 6. Bloch bands for 1 MeV positrons channeled along the 
< 110 > axis in gold. The bands are shown in a two-dimensional 
extended zone scheme along a direction that forms an angle of 10” 
with the (100) plane. 
L.V. Huu et ul./ Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Rex B i 19 f 1996) 30-41 37 
atomic cores where the total electron density is high. The 
rate at large angles approaches the random value of 24/s, 
indicated by the solid line in the figure, which is obtained 
for a uniform transverse positron flux. The small increase 
for zero angle (on axis) is a symmetry effect which causes 
the lowest excited states to have an exactly vanishing 
overlap with the atomic stings for this incidence angle. 
The ground state, which is the only of these states popu- 
lated on axis, has a very small but nonvanishing overlap 
with the atomic strings. 
To illustrate our ability to selectively probe valence 
electrons with use of the channeling effect, we note that 
the contribution from valence electrons to the zero angle 
annihilation rate in Fig. 4 is greater than 30%. This is 
obtained from the electron density of 0.17 e/A3 in the 
center of the < I10 > channel, as shown in Fig. 5, and 
constitutes a much larger relative contribution than is 
obtained for low order Fourier components in X-ray and 
electron diffraction experiments. The demonstrated spatial 
selectivity is an important aspect for the ultimate utility of 
channeling annihilation experiments. 
We have estimated dechanneling effects due to elec- 
tronic multiple scattering and these results indicate that we 
could increase our counting rates by an order of magnitude 
by using thicker crystals (up to several microns). Taking 
into account, however, the enhanced background problems 
due to nuclear multiple scattering und:r non-channeling 
conditions, we conclude that the 6000 A crystal thickness 
is a good choice for the initial demonstration of channeling 
annihilation effects. 
In the design of the detector geometry for the annihila- 
tion photons, we make use of the fact that the relativistic motion of the incoming positrons causes a forward peaking 
of the gamma-rays. With a relatively simple detector ge- 
ometry, consisting of 16 sodium iodide and bismuth ger- 
manate scintillators, we can detect annihilation gammas 
with an efficiency of 60% [22]. 
4. Spin magnetic densities 
Our ultimate goal is to use the combination of channel- 
ing and two-photon annihilation in flight to study spin 
magnetic densities in thin magnetic films. The success of 
this endeavor depends on two major facts: a high sensitiv- 
ity of the annihilation cross section to the relative spin 
directions of the annihilating electron-positron pair and 
the possibility for creating spin polarized positron sources. 
The differential cross sections for parallel and anti-parallel 
spins are shown in Fig. 7 as a function of angle of one of 
the annihilation gammas with respect to the incoming 
positron direction [23]. For 1 MeV positrons, the differen- 
tial cross section for anti-parallel spins is significantly 
higher than the cross section for parallel spins, particularly 
at the smallest angles. At around 4 MeV, the cross sections 
are equal and at higher energies, the cross section for 
parallel spins dominates. Even with an integration over 
angles in Fig. 7, the total annihilation cross section for 
anti-parallel spins is 2.5 times larger than for parallel 
spins. 
Furthermore, the positron source at Brookhaven can be 
modified to produce a beam of longitudinally polarized 
positrons [24,25]. We utilize that parity is not conserved in 
beta decay which is the source of our positrons as de- 
Differential Cross Section 
for Annihilation in Flight 
of 1MeV Positrons 
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 
e (Rad) 
Fig. 7. Differential cross sections for two-photon annihilation of I MeV positrons with electrons at rest. We show the cross sections for the 
two possible relative spin orientations of the annihilating pair as a function of angle bchveen one of the photons and the direction of the 
incoming positron. 
38 L.V. Hau et al. / Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 119 (1996) 30-41 
Continuum Potential for Iron <lOO> We shall consider channeling of 1 MeV positrons in a 
single crystal of iron as an example. Iron is a ferromag- 
netic material with a Curie temperature of 1043 K, and the 
easy magnetization direction is along the < 100 > 
direction. Since the positrons are longitudinally polarized, 
we consider channeling along the < 100 > direction, and 
the continuum potential for this axis is shown in Fig. 8. 
The spin magnetic density in iron, obtained from spin 
density functional methods [21,26], is shown in Fig. 9 as 
the difference between spin-up and spin-down densities 
relative to the total electron density. As expected, no net 
spin density is obtained inside the atomic cores. In the 
interstices, we see regions with a predominant spin-down 
density and regions with mainly spin-up density. The 
average magnetization in iron is 2.2 Bohr magnetons per 
Fig. 8. Continuum potential for positrons channeled along the 
< 100 > easy magnetization axis in iron. 
scribed above. The highest degree of polarization is ob- 
tained for positrons close to the endpoint energy of the 
beta spectrum and through velocity selection, a spin polar- 
ized positron beam may be obtained. With a loss in flux of 
a factor of ten, we can obtain a spin polarization of 
= 80%. 
Relative Spin Density of Iron <loo> Overlap of Positron Eigen Functions and 
Relative Spin Density 
0.15 Podan of (1 OO> axes 
.i 0.1 
B 0.05 
.B 
:: 0 
.z -0.05 
z -0.1 
Fig. 9. The net spin density relative to the total electron density in 
iron, shown in the plane perpendicular to the < 100 > axis. The 
density is averaged along the < 100 > direction, and the posi- 
tions of the < 100 > axes in the transverse plane are shown in the 
insert. ‘Ihe magnetization in iron is caused by unpaired d electrons 
and .ihe presence of spin down parts in the spin density distribu- 
tion is a crystalline effect. It accounts for the fact that the average 
magnetization in crystalline iron is only 2.2 Bohr magnetons 
compared to 4 Bohr magnetons in atomic iron. Fig. 10. Relative spin density (from Fig. 9) shown together with 
the transverse ground state (top> and first excited state (bottom) of 
1 MeV positrons channeled along the < 100 > axis in iron. The 
ground state probes the spatial region with a net spin down 
density whereas the first excited state digs into the spin up part of 
the distribution. 
L.V. Hau ef ~1. / Nucl. Instr. and Merh. in Plry.ys. Res. B I19 (1996) 30-41 39 
0.6 
0.2 
0.1 
0 Population of Ground and First Excited States 
Ground State + 
First Excited State -+--- 
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5 
Incidence Angle (degrees) 
Fig. I I. Population of the ground and first excited states, shown in 
Fig. IO, as a function of incidence angle with the < 100 > axis. 
unit cell. The spin down parts of the spin density distribu- 
tion in Fig. 9 account for the decrease in magnetization 
from 4 Bohr magnetons in atomic iron. 
Polamation Ratlo vs. Inudence Angle for Ctystallme Iron <loo> 
1 
0.025 
-I 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 
Incidence Angie (degrees) 
Fig. 12. We show the polarization ratio defined as the difference 
between the annihilation rates for the two possible relative spin 
orientations of the annihilating pair relative to the total annihila- 
tion rate. The polarization ratio is given as a function of incidence 
angle for I MeV positrons channeled along the < lOO> axis in 
iron. The angle to a (100) plane is 10”. We have indicated the 
random polarization ratio which is obtained with a uniform positron 
flux. In Fig. 10 we show the two deepest bound, transverse 
positron channeling states together with the spin magnetic 
density (as in Fig. 9). The lowest lying state predominantly 
probes the spin-down part of the density distribution 
whereas the first excited state probes the spin-up part. We 
can selectively populate these states by changing the inci- 
dence angle of the channeled positrons with respect to the 
Annihilation Rate vs. Incidence Angle 
Incidence Angle (degrees) 
Energy Bands for 1 MeV Positrons in Iron < lOO> 
45 
: Angle of Population Change 
40 - 
k 
35 - j\ 
rl-[;::: v “L 
30 
‘WY-‘\ 
25 
-“L 
-i_ J 
15’ I ’ ’ I:1 ’ t ’ ’ ’ 
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5 
Incidence Angle (degrees) 
Fig. 13. (a) Annihilation rate as a function of incidence angle for I 
MeV positrons channeled along < 100 > in iron. The plot corre- 
sponds to a narrow range of angles and shows an example of an 
abrupt dip in annihilation rate at an incidence angle of 0.225”. The 
dip coincides with a near degeneracy between the fourth and fifth 
Bloch bands as seen in (b). At this angle, a Bragg condition is 
satisfied and the character of the populated eigenstates will change 
rapidly across the Bragg angle. This explains the abrupt change of 
annihilation rate. 
40 L.V. Hau et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B I I9 (1996) 30-41 
atomic string as seen in Fig. 11 where the population of 
the two lowest states is shown as a function of incidence 
angle. The population amplitudes of the states are obtained 
as overlap integrals between the incident transverse plane 
wave and the eigenstates. The resulting annihilation rate is 
shown in Fig. 12 as a function of incidence angle. We 
show the polarization ratio defined as the difference be- 
tween the annihilation rates for the two possible spin 
polarizations of the positron beam with respect to the 
magnetization direction in iron, relative to the total anni- 
hilation rate. We see a minimum for the smallest angles 
and an increase for angles larger than 0.15’. This is a 
reflection of the fact that for angles smaller than 0.15’, the 
deepest bound channeling state is predominantly populated 
and hence the spin-down part of the spin density distribu- 
tion is probed. For larger angles, mainly the first excited 
state, which probes the spin-up part, is populated. For even 
larger angles, the positron wavefunction penetrates into the 
cores with no net spin polarization. This causes the de- 
crease for the largest angles in Fig. 12, where the annihila- 
tion rate approaches the random value of 0.037. The 
random value is obtained for a uniform positron flux 
annihilating with valence electrons with a net spin density 
of 2.2 Bohr magnetons per unit cell. 
We have explored the origin of the spikes occurring in 
the figures (4 and 12) for annihilation rates as a function of 
incidence angle. The annihilation rate in iron for an unpo- 
larized positron beam is shown in Fig. 13a in a small 
angular region. The abrupt dip at 0.225” is related to the 
avoided crossing at that angle of the fourth and fifth 
energy bands, as shown in Fig. 13b. In a narrow angular 
Polarization Ratios vs. lnudence Angle for Crystalline and Atomic Iron <loo> 
lnadence Angie (degrees) 
Fig. 14. Polarization ratio as a function of incidence angle for 1 
MeV positrons channeled along the < 100 > axis in crystalline 
iron (as in Fig. 12) and in a BCC crystal made up of overlapping 
iron atoms. Note the different scale for the two cmves. range, population amplitudes for the corresponding Bloch 
states change rapidly. 
To show the sensitivity of the channeling-annihilation 
probe to crystalline effects, we compare in Fig. 14 the 
polarization ratio for crystalline iron (as in Fig. 12) to the 
ratio for a crystal made up of overlapping atomic iron. In 
the latter case, we have 4 Bohr magnetons per unit cell and 
the random value is correspondingly higher. We see a clear 
difference between the curves for small angles due to the 
missing spin-down contribution in atomic iron. We con- 
clude that our method is highly sensitive to crystalline 
effects of the spin-magnetic density. 
5. Conclusion 
We have shown a potential new use of channeling for 
materials research. By combining the channeling effect for 
positrons with two-photon annihilation in flight, acting as a 
localized probe, we have at hand a very sensitive tool for 
studying valence electron and spin magnetic densities. 
Channeled positrons can be guided into the interstitial 
regions of a crystal, with high concentrations of valence 
electrons. We can furthermore select different parts of the 
valence electron density distribution by utilizing that dif- 
ferent channeling states probe different parts of the crystal 
and that those states can be selectively populated by 
changing the incidence angle of the channeled positrons 
with respect to the atomic string direction. Particularly 
intriguing is the possibility for using our new tool in 
studies of spin magnetic densities in thin magnetic films. 
Spin densities have so far been studied by neutron diffrac- 
tion [27] which requires large samples and a reactor. The 
possibility for studying thin films could be of major tech- 
nological importance in connection with development of 
efficient data-storage media. Planned upgrades of the 
positron source at Brookhaven National Laboratory, in- 
volving a projected increase in the positron flux by several 
orders of magnitude, make the spin magnetic density stud- 
ies feasible. 
Further use of the channeling effect involves develop- 
ment of a positron microscope. One of the major draw- 
backs of transmission electron microscopes is the limited 
range ( = 1000 A> of electrons in the samples under inves- 
tigation. With use of the channeling effect, positrons could 
be guided through the interstices of the crystal, with 
minimum scattering on nuclei, and hence microscopy could 
be performed on samples with thicknesses of several mi- 
crons. 
References 
111 L.V. Hau, M.M. Bums, and J.A. Golovchenko, Phys. Rev. A 
45 (1992) 6468. 
[2] L.V. Hau, J.A. Golovchenko and M.M. Bums, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 74 (1995) 3 138. 
L.V. Hau et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 119 (1996) 30-41 41 
[3] J. Schmiedmayer, Appl. Phys. B 60 (l?!I5) 169. 
[4] M.J. Renn, D. Montgomery, 0. Vdovin, D.Z. Anderson, C.E. 
Wieman and E.A. Cornell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 3253. 
[5] J. Opt. Sot. Am. B 6 (1989), topical issue. 
[6] J. Lindhard, K. Dan. Vid. Selsk. Mat. Fys. Medd. 34, no. 14 
(1965). 
[7] P. Lervig. J. Lindhard and V. Nielsen, Nucl. Phys. A 96 
(1967) 481. 
[8] L.C. Feldman, J.W. Mayer and ST. Picraux, Materials Anal- 
ysis by ion Channeling (Academic Press, New York, 19821. 
[9] J.U. Andersen, in: Semiclassical Descriptions of Atomic and 
Nuclear Collisions, eds J. Bang and J. de Boer (North- 
Holland, 1985) ~463. 
[l I] J.U. Andersen and J.A. Davies, Nucl. Ins&. and Meth. 132 
(1976) 179. [IO] N. Bohr, K. Dan. Vid. Selsk. Mat. Fys. Medd. 18, no. 8 
( 1948). 
[12] J.F. Bak et al., Phys. Rev. A 25 (1982) 1334. 
(131 R.L. Swent, R.H. Pantell, M.J. Alguard, B.L. Berman, S.D. 
Bloom and S. Datz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43 (1979) 1723. 
[14] J.U. Andersen and E. Laegsgaard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 44 (1980) 
1079. 
[ 151 J.U. Andersen, E. Lzgsgaard and A.H. Sorensen, Nucl. Instr. 
and Meth. B 2 (1984) 63. [16] J.U. Andersen, E. Bonderup, E. Lregsgaard and A.H. Sore- 
nsen, Phys. Scripta 28 (1983) 308. 
(171 L.V. Hau and J.U. Andersen, Phys. Rev. A 47 (1993) 4007. 
[IS] L.V. Hau, E. Laegsgaard and J.U. Andersen, Nucl. Instr. and 
Meth. B 48 (1990) 244. 
[19] R. Haakenaasen, L.V. Hau, J.A. Golovchenko. J.C. 
Palathinghal. J.P. Peng, P. Asoka-Kumar and K.G. Lynn, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 1650. 
[20] P. Asoka-Kumar et al.. Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 337 (1993) 
3. 
1241 J. Van House and P.W. Zitzewitz. Phys. Rev. A 29 (1984) 
96. [21] These calculations were performed by M. Weincrt. 
Brookhaven National Laboratory. 
[22] R. Haakenaasen, Ph.D. diss., Harvard University (1995). 
[23] See: J.J. Sakurai. Advanced Quantum Mechanics (Addison- 
Wesley, Reading, MA, 1967). 
[25] D.W. Gidley. A.R. Koymen and T. Weston Capehart. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 49 (1982) 1779. 
[26] A.K. RajagopaJ, in: Advances in Chemical Physics, Vol. 41, 
eds. I Progogine and S.A. Rice (Wiley, New York, 1980). 
[27] C.G. Shull, Early Development of Neutron Scattering (Nobel 
Prize Lecture), Rev. Mod. Phys. 67. no. 4 (1995). in press. 
