Pergamon Vacuum/volume 47lnumbers 6-6fpages 903 to 906/1996 
Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved 
PII: SOO42-207X(96)00091-7 0042-207X/96 $15.00+.00 
La and Ce-incorporation effects on the surface 
properties of the fluorinated (Ti,Zr)(Mn,Cr,Ni), 
hydriding alloys 
F J Liu, K Kitayama and S Suda, Department of Chemical Engineering, Kogakuin University, 2665- 1, 
Nakano-machi, Hachioji-shi, Tokyo 792, Japan 
A small amount of La or Ce incorporation into AB, alloys as Ti,_,_&_,(La/Ce), Mn0.8Cro.sNi0.r compounds 
with x varying from 0.0 to 0.05 has been performed in order to improve the activation characteristics of Ti-Zr 
based AB, hydriding alloys in gas-solid reactions. The fluorinated surface properties of these compounds 
have been investigated in addition to structural and compositional analysis by ESCA, EPMA, XRD and 
microscope observations. La or Ce-incorporation forms La or Ce-rich secondary phase homogeneously 
distributed both at the grain boundaries of the original AB, phase and at the particle surface. These secondary 
phases contribute to the significant improvement of the activation characteristics. Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier 
Science Ltd. 
Key words: Fluorination treatment, incorporation effect, La/Cc-fluorinated surface, Ni-enriched surface, 
activation characteristics. 
Introduction Experimental procedures 
Multicomponent Ti-Zr based Cl4 and Cl5 Laves phase alloys 
have been extensively developed not only as hydrogen storage 
materials for gasssolid reactions but also as electrode materials 
for MH-Ni batteries because of their high electrochemical 
capacities compared with those of AB5 alloysm3 The authors’ 
previous studies on La-incorporated (Ti,Zr) (Mn,Cr,Ni), hyd- 
riding alloys in a gas phase reaction disclosed that small amounts 
of La-incorporation in AB, system alloys form the island-like 
La-enriched phases in the original AB, matrix phase, which result 
in a dramatic improvement of the activation characteristics with- 
out decrease of hydriding capacity. This improvment is enhanced 
in particular after fluorination treatment using an F-containing 
aqueous solution as reported elsewhere.” 
This investigation is aimed at studying the fluorination effects 
of La-incorporated (Ti.Zr)(Mn.Cr.Ni)z hydriding alloys on the 
surface properties in view of their gas-solid reaction charac- 
teristics through X-ray photoemission spectroscope (XPS), elec- 
tron probe microanalyzer (EPMA) and X-ray diffractometer 
(XRD) studies as well as microscopic observations. The work is 
extended from La-incorporation to Ce in order to understand 
the possibility of Mm (mischmetal)-incorporation in this system 
of AB, alloys for future applications. Hz absorption mechanism 
on the improved La or Ce-fluorinated surface is discussed based 
on the H, activation and surface analysis results. Alloy preparation. Based on our previous studies on La- 
incorporated Ti, 5_ y *Zr,, 5_-r,2Zr,, 5p...zLa,Mn, &rO %Ni, 4 alloys 
(x = O.O-O.l),” La or Ce is fixed in this study to I = 0.05, i.e. 
the composnlon 1s Tr-0.475Zr,, 475 (La/Ce),,,,Mn, &rO XNi,,.4. 
Alloy samples were prepared by non-consumable (IV) electrode 
melting of the elements on a water cooled Cu hearth in an argon 
atmosphere. Tio.sp ui2Zr0.~_ ,.zMno,Cr, ,Ni,, (x = 0, 0.05) are 
melted first, and then they are remelted with additional pure La 
or Ce at an atomic ratio of 0.05 to obtain a La or Ce-enriched 
secondary phase distributed in the original AB: phase as tiny 
islands. Because of the difference of melting point in each phase, 
the nucleation and growth of AB2 phase started from the melt 
first during solidification, and then the La or Ce-enriched liquid 
phase followed to precipitate at the AB, grain boundaries. Water 
cooling results in a rapid solidification and is effective in forming 
the La or Ce-enriched secondary phase. Each specimen was 
melted four times to ensure the homogeneous distribution of 
the secondary phases, but no further annealing treatment was 
performed in this study. The sample ingots were mechanically 
ground into the average particle size between 250 and 106 pm. 
The fluorination treatment was performed by putting the sample 
powders in a fluorine-containing aqueous solution at a certain 
ratio of alloy to solution for about 3 h, and then followed by 
water washing and naturally dried in air. 
903 
FJ Liu eta/: Fluorinated (Ti,ZrHMn,Cr,Ni), hydriding alloys 
Figure 1. Metallographic pictures of La or Ce-incorporatedTi, 5m rl.ZZr,I,zm ~,2(La/Ce),Mn,,,Cr,,*Nio.4 (x = 0.05) 
Results and discussion 
Metallographic microstructures. The metallographic micro- 
structure shown in Figure 1 indicates a mixed phase structure 
formed on both the La and Ce-incorporated (Ti,Zr)(Mn,Cr,Ni), 
alloys. It is found that La or Ce cannot substitute into the matrix 
to form a single AB, Cl4 Laves phase,’ but forms a La or Ce- 
containing secondary phase as small dark islands homogeneously 
distributed in the AB, matrix phase. The Ce-rich islands show 
more irregular shapes than those of La, perhaps caused by the 
relatively lower melting temperature of Ce. X-ray mapping 
focused on the La or Ce-enriched islands performed by EPMA4.6 
shows that these secondary phases are not pure La or Ce, but are 
associated with Ni-element to form La-Ni or Ce-Ni phases. 
The compositions of these La-Ni or Cc-Ni phases could not be 
identified by an XRD analysis due to the technical difficulties to 
distinguish the X-ray diffraction patterns between the major AB1 
phase and the extremely small La or Ce-rich phase. 
Activation characteristics. Figure 2 shows the effect of La or Ce- 
incorporation on the activation characteristics of the AB2 system 
alloys before and after fluorination. It can be seen that the 
Ti, sZrO.sMn,, 8Cr,.,Ni0.4 alloy without La or Ce-incorporation 
exhibits the poor activation result, and even worse after Auo- 
rination, where the initial hydriding reaction could not start even 
after 5 h at 40°C and 1.0 MPa H, atmosphere. 
On the contrary, La or Ce-incorporation improves the acti- 
vation characteristics significantly by cutting the incubation time 
which is defined as the required time interval before starting the hydriding reaction (see Figure 2(A)). The fluorination treatment 
has two effects: increasing the reaction kinetics as well as La or 
Ce-incorporation (see Figure 2(B)). Ce-incorporation is found to 
be more effective in improving the reaction kinetics than La. 
However, it is evident that La or Ce-incorporation is effective 
in accelerating the initial activation, especially after fluorination. 
This contributes to the formation of the island-like LaaNi or Gee 
Ni secondary phases and the increase of fluorination effects on 
these compounds. 
Surface analysis. The fluorination treatment on La or Ce-incor- 
porated AB, system alloys has been found experimentally to 
improve the activation characteristics of AB, alloys. This fluor- 
ination effect is to be correlated with the past studies on AB, 
alloys such as LaNi4,7A10,.i,7.8 where a LaF, coating followed by a 
metallic Ni-rich substrate takes place during treatment. 
In this work, the surface studies were performed in order to 
clarify the fluorination effects on both the La or Ce-rich sec- 
ondary phase and the AB, matrix phase. The roles of the Ni 
behaviors on the surface of both the phases before and after 
fluorination are the authors’ special concerns in the present study. 
AB, phase. The surface chemical states of the constituent 
elements were analyzed by XPS with MgKcl (hv- 1253.6 eV) 
radiation and a base pressure of lo-’ Pa using the spectra of 
Ti2p, Zr3d, Mn2pp,;*, Cr2p and Ni2p,:, core levels on both the 
untreated and treated Ti,,,Zr,,sMn,.,Cr,.,Ni,,~ alloy, as indicated 
in the upper part of Figure 3 (the spectra of the untreated sample 
I 
2 s 0.8 
." 
s B 0.6 
; 0.4 
3 
0.2 Pi-l.0 h4Pa 
-O- La/Ce=O 
-O- Ce=O.O5 
+ La-O.05 
0 
0 30 60 90 120 I 
Time Onin) $!fz% Pi=l.OMPa 
0 30 60 90 120 150 I 
Time (min) 
Figure 2. Initial activation of Ti,,_x/2Zr,, ~__~/2(La/Ce),Mn,,Cr,,Ni,, alloys (x = 0, 0.05) with and without fluorination at 40°C and 1.0 MPa H, 
pressure. 
904 
FJ Liu era!: Fluorinated (Ti,Zr)(Mn,Cr,Ni), hydriding alloys 
(Min.) 
462 458 454 188 184 180 646 642 638 SiO 5i6 5% 862 858 854 690 686 682 536 s32 528 846 842 838 834 
Figure 3. XPS spectra of the fluorinated Ti,,~r2Zr05~,,La,Mno,Cr,,,Ni,,. x = 0.0 (top); x = 0.05 (bottom). 
is omitted here). The core-level spectra reveal that the top surface 
is completely oxidized and is identified to be ZrO, with a sep- 
aration energy of 2.2 eV between the main peak (Eb = 182.4 eV) 
and the satellite peak (Eb = 184.6 eV), and TiO, of a strong peak 
at Eb = 458.6 eV, respectively. ZrO, and TiO, remain stable 
at the surface and persist even after prolonged sputtering. The 
spectrum of Mn2p,,> shows a weak peak signal and it is difficult 
to identify the chemical state at the top-layer, but gradually 
changes into a metallic state at Eb = 638.6 eV with increasing 
sputtering time. The spectrum of Ni2pJjz core level indicates that 
Ni is also hydroxidized to Ni(OH)2. Increasing sputtering time 
results in a decrease of Ni-hydroxide, but an increase of metallic 
Ni. Through the two broad peaks at about 576.6574.0 eV and 
a single peak at Eb = 583.0 eV, Cr is identified as a metallic Cr 
with very limited Cr-fluoride appearing as CrF,. Using the cross 
section of Ti2p, Zr3d, Mn2p, ?, Cr2p and Ni2pjjz peaks, the weight 
ratios of Ti”: Zr”: Mn”: Cr”: Ni” are quantitatively determined. 
The calculated data show that the top surface composition of the 
T10.5ZrI~.~Mn0 J% J% compound is changed from Ti,,,Zr,,,,, 
Mn,, ,,,Cr? OhhNi(l xx7 before treatment into Ti, sZro.2,Mno 36Cr, 2x 
Ni,,,, after treatment, indicating a Ni-enriched surface layer 
formed after fluorination. 
The formation of Ni-rich surface is caused by the selective 
dissolution of the elements such as Zr, Ti, Mn and Cr into the F- 
containing solution during treatment.’ This result is contrary to 
those of AB, alloys in which LaF, formation and Ni dissolution 
during treatment are predominant.’ La-Ni or Ce-Ni phase. To understand the improved activation 
characteristics obtained by La or Ce-incorporation after fluo- 
rination, the surface compositions of fluorinated La or Ce-incor- 
porated samples were also analyzed by ESCA, and the results are 
illustrated in the lower part of Figure 3 for the La-incorporated 
sample only. Compared with those of core-level spectra of non 
La or Ce-incorporated sample, a single peak at Eb = 838 eV on 
the La3d,., core-level spectrum and a strong fluorine peak at 
Eb = 685 eV on the FdSj2 core-level spectrum are observed 
additionally. This result clarifies the existence of LaF, which 
appears on the surface. By increasing the sputtering time. the 
peak at Eb = 838 eV on the La3dX,:, core-level spectrum shifts to 
Eb = 836 eV which is known as metallic La. EPMA analysis 
further confirmed this result4.6 which showed the isolated La-Ni 
or CeeNi secondary phases dispersing on the fractured particle 
surface which is covered by LaF,. It should be noted that the 
fluoride formation is restricted only on parts of the La Ni or Ce-- 
Ni secondary phases. 
Through the above analysis, it becomes clear that the fluo- 
rination is effective in increasing the Ni distribution on the surface 
of the AB? matrix phase, and simultaneously forming the flu- 
orides on the surface of La-Ni or Ce+Ni secondary phase. This 
indicates that the fluorination effects on the La and Ce-incor- 
porated AB, alloys are not only limited to the fluoride formation, 
but also lead to the Ni-enrichment at the surface. As the AB1 
matrix is hardly protected without the fluoride coating and 
becomes the more passive Zr-Ti oxides during drying in air after 
905 
FJ Liu eta/: Fluorinated (Ti,Zr)(Mn,Cr,Ni), hydriding alloys 
treatment, its surface reactivity is deteriorated and exhibits the 
converse effect on the activation characteristics without incor- 
porating La or Ce. 
H2 absorption mechanism on the improved La and Ce-fluorinated 
surface. It is concluded that the significant improvement on the 
activation characteristics of La and Ce-incorporated Ti-Zr based 
AB, alloys is strongly related to the formation of La-Ni or Ce- 
Ni secondary phase dispersed in the original AB2 matrix. By the 
fluorination, La-Ni or Ce-Ni phase forms the fluoride coating 
and the AB, phase changes its top-layer composition to Ni- 
enriched surface. The fluorinated La-Ni or Ce-Ni secondary 
phases provide abundant number of hydrogen uptake sites to 
convert molecular hydrogen to monatomic hydrogen, so as to 
accelerate the initial activation. The Ni-enriched AB2 phase acts 
also as the catalyst for the rapid conversion of hydrogen mol- 
ecules to atoms, but is easily deactivated without the shielding 
protection by fluoride coating. This Hz absorption mechanism is 
schematically illustrated in Figure 4. 
H2 
Solid phase Interface Gas phase 
Figure 4. A schematic model describing H, absorption mechanism at the 
fluorinated La or Ce-incorporated alloy surface. Conclusions 
A mixed phase structure composed by an AB2 Laves phase matrix 
with a highly active La-Ni or Ce-Ni secondary phase, distributed 
at the grain boundaries as tiny islands, can be obtained by incor- 
porating small amounts of La or Ce into Ti,5_utrZro s_.,zMn, 8 
(La/Ce),Cr,.,Ni,, alloys with x varying from 0 to 0.05. The 
La-Ni or Ce-Ni secondary phases dispersed on the fractured 
AB, alloy surface act as the catalytic site for rapid H2 uptake. 
By fluorination, the effect of La-Ni or Ce-Ni sites can be fur- 
ther improved by forming a more reactive La or Ce fluoride 
coating on the La-Ni or Ce-Ni secondary phases, and the 
poor surface of AB2 matrix phase changes its composition into 
Ni-enrichment. These two effects contribute individually to 
the improvement of activation kinetics by enhancing the dis- 
sociative chemisorption of H, molecules into H atoms. 
In summary, it becomes clear that the difficulties for fluo- 
rinating AB, alloys can be overcome by incorporating a small 
amount of rare earth elements, such as La or Ce. in a non- 
stoichiometric manner. 
References 
’ S Wakao, H Sawa, H Nakano, S Chubachi and M Abe, J Less-Common 
Metals, 131, 311 (1987). 
‘Y Moriwaki, T Gamo, A Shintani and T Iwaki, Eur Patent 0,293.660 
(1988). 
3M A Fetcenko, S Venkatesan and S R Oveshinsky, EIec1rochemicaI 
Society Proc, 92-5, 141 (1992). 
4F-J Liu, G Sandrock and S Suds, Surface and metallographic micro- 
structure of the La-added AB2 compound (Ti,Zr)(Mn,Cr,Ni),; F-J Liu 
and S Suds, F-treatment effect on the hydriding properties of La-sub- 
stituted AB2 compound (Ti,Zr)(Mn,Cr,Ni),; Ini Symp on Melal-Hydro- 
gen Systems, Fundamentals and Applications, Nov. 611, 1994 in Japan; 
J AlIoys Compounds (in press). 
‘F-J Liu, S Suda and G Sandrock, J Alloys Compounds (in press). 
6K Kitayama, D Komori, F-J Liu and S Suds, Research Reports qf 
Kogakuin University, 78, 63 (1995). 
‘F-J Liu, G Sandrock and S Suds, J Alloys Compounds, 190, 57 (1992). 
‘X-L Wang and S Suds, J Alloys Compounds, 194,73 (1993). 
9S Suda, H Fuse, K Nakajima, T Okazaki and A Hiromoto, Research 
Reports of Kogakuin University, 75,41 (1993). 
906 
