Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B 111 (1996) 17 1- 175 
__ 
@ NUNI B 
ELSEVIER Beam Interactions 
with Materials&Atoms 
Position sensitive detection of individual nuclear particle scintillations 
using image intensifier tubes 
Amar Sinha a7*, B.D. Bhawe ‘, C.G. Panchal a, A. Shyam a, M. Srinivasan a, V.M. Joshi b 
a Neutron Physics Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay-400 085, India 
b Electronics Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay-400 08.5, India 
’ Technical Physics and Prototype Engineering Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay-400 085, India 
Received 9 June 1995; revised form received 3 October 1995 
Abstract 
An imaging position sensitive detector for charged particles, neutrons, X- and gamma rays has been developed. The 
novel feature of this scintillation imaging radiation detector is its ability to detect individual nuclear particle scintillations 
with a high degree of spatial resolution. The key elements of this detector system are a high gain, low noise image intensifier 
tube, a CCD camera and commercially available image processing hardware and software. This detector system is highly 
effective for applications such as low fluence and real time neutron radiography, mapping of radioactive contamination in 
nuclear reactor fuel rods, X-ray diffraction imaging, high speed autoradiography and in general position sensitive detection 
of nuclear radiation. Results of some of the exploratory experiments carried out using this detector system are presented in 
this paper. 
1. Introduction 
Position sensitive radiation detectors find widespread 
applications in low and high energy nuclear physics, neu- 
tron scattering, X-ray diffraction studies, radiography and 
medical applications. Over the years a wide variety of 
position encoding methods have been devised for obtain- 
ing online and offline one and two dimensional position 
information for nuclear particle interactions. The online 
position encoding method can broadly be grouped into 
three categories: (1) arrays of individually processed dis- 
crete detection elements [1,2], (2) weighted networks of 
passive components connecting detection elements [3-51 
and (3) scintillation imaging technique [6,7] which pro- 
vidks direct scintillation images on a video monitor. In 
cases where real time measurements involving processes 
with long time constants of a few tens of milliseconds are 
invblved or steady state measurements are to be made, the 
thizd type of detector offers a simple and inexpensive 
method of position encoding. In this technique, instead of 
coupling a scintillator to a pulse readout device such as a 
phtitomultiplier or a microchannel plate, it is directly cou- 
pled to a position sensitive device such as a solid state 
charge coupled device (CCD) or a combination of image 
intensifier and CCD and a video monitor. Some of the 
* Corresponding author. Fax + 91 22 5560750. attractive features of imaging of nuclear radiation using 
image intensifier tubes is increased detection quantum 
efficiency, wide dynamic range (compared to photographic 
film) [8] and retention of position information of nuclear 
scintillation. Furthermore the information is available on- 
line with the possibility of further processing using frame 
grabber and processors. In addition these detectors can 
offer very high spatial resolution (typically 30 km at the 
image intensifier level) depending on their design. In 
recent years several such detectors have been developed 
for specific applications [9, lo]. 
We report in this paper on the development of a 
position sensitive detector based on a pair of image intensi- 
fier tubes, a CCD camera, frame grabber and processor 
card which is modular in design and can be adapted to 
detect various nuclear radiations. The attractive feature of 
this scintillation imaging radiation detector is its ability to 
detect individual nuclear particle scintillations with a high 
degree of spatial resolution. This paper describes the de- 
sign of this detector system and some of the preliminary 
results obtained using this detector. 
2. Description of the scintillation imaging system 
The primary imaging sensor for detection of nuclear 
radiation such as charged particles, neutrons, X- or gamma 
rays is a suitable scintillator. This scintillator is optically 
0168-583X/96/$15.00 0 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
SSDI 0168-583X(95)01253-2 
172 A. Sinha et al. / Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 111 (1996) I71 -I 75 
Schematic Of Experimental setup 
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of nuclear particle imaging system. 
coupled to a pair of image intensifier tubes. The nature of 
optical coupling depends upon the detector size required 
and the type and strength of radiation to be imaged. 
Fig. 1 shows the schematic diagram of the experimental 
arrangement used by us. The experimental set up from 
intensifier to frame grabber is common for all experiments. 
Only in some cases the coupling scheme between scintilla- 
tor and input face plate of the image intensifier tube has 
been changed. This has been done in the cases where the 
signal to noise ratio is not good enough even after intensi- 
fication. The scintillation images produced by incoming 
charged particle or neutron or X- or gamma ray were 
intensified by an image intensifier tube and converted into 
a video signal using a CCD camera. These images are then 
digitized using a frame grabber and processed using a 
specialized frame processor. These images can then be 
displayed using a video monitor or recorded on a video 
tape recorder (VTR). 
The two second generation image intensifier tubes used 
by us have gains of 30000 and 100000 respectively. The 
typical spatial resolution of these tubes is 30 line pairs per 
mm. The input and output surfaces of both the image 
intensifier tubes are made up of fibre optic face plates. The 
diameter of the input and output face plates of the first 
image intensifier tube. is 2.5 mm and that of the second 
image intensifier tube 18 mm. The Hitachi make CCD 
camera employed by us uses 18 mm image size CCD 
having 756(H) X 581(V) effective number of pixels with a 
pitch of 11 .O p,rn (H) X 11.0 km (V). The video signals 
obtained from the CCD camera are digitized using a 8 bit 
Erame grabber. Using input look up table approach we can 
“threshold” the video signal to subtract noise. We have 
developed programs to perform tasks such as integration, 
thresholding, etc. The-operation such as integration, aver- 
aging etc. are carried out using a 16 bit processor card. 
This scintillation imaging system can be operated in 
three basic modes of operations. In the fist, it serves as a 
simple frame grabber and retains all the original pixel 
intensity information per frame; in the second or counting 
mode it integrates background subtracted counts into a 
buffer image over a preset time period; in the third mode, 
it categorizes detected events by pixel intensity. The time 
resolution of the system is limited to 40 ms by the serial 
readout circuitry of CCD camera. There have been at- 
tempts to use faster readout CCD cameras but these re- 
quire customized design of CCD electronics. An ingenious 
technique to surmount this problem has been discussed by Kella et al. [ll]. The video images obtained by CCD 
cameras can be subjected to a variety of image processing 
techniques for different applications. One other advantage 
of this technique is that in case of radiation emitting 
objects, not only imaging of the scintillations be obtained 
but a direct image of the object can also be recorded for 
studying the spatial correlation of the visible image of the 
sample along with its “radiation map”. Details of the 
analysis of imaging system characterization will be pre- 
sented in a separate paper. 
3. Scintillation imaging of charged particles 
In the initial series of experiments, scintillations of 
alphas from a 241Am source of various strengths ranging 
from 173 dpm to several thousand dpm were used. These 
alpha sources were placed in contact with a thin ZnS(Ag) 
scintillator screen. The choice of a ZnS scintillator was 
dictated by the fact that the light output from this scintilla- 
tor is higher compared to other commonly used charged 
particle scintillators even though this scintillator is granu- 
lar. Subsequently a thin CsI(T1) scintillator has also been 
used to image alphas. In the subsequent part of this section 
we discuss the results obtained using ZnS scintillators 
only. It was found that if the ZnS scintillator screen is 
placed in contact with the input fibre optic face plate of the 
image intensifier tube, the light output is sufficient for 
registration by CCD camera even with only one stage of 
light intensification (single image intensifier) being used. 
However if the scintillator screen and image intensifier 
tube are optically coupled, such as in the case of imaging 
of large size objects, single stage of image intensification 
is not adequate for registration by the CCD camera used 
by us and two stage image intensification is required. A 
higher sensitivity CCD camera is required to overcome 
these limitations. It is found that with optical coupling and 
“thresholding” to suppress intensifier tube noise, a single 
particle event registration efficiency in excess of 60% in 
2 rr geometry is achieved [ 121. The efficiency of registra- 
tion is found to depend on the type of coupling and the 
threshold level employed. Time integrated counting soft- 
ware has been developed for this purpose which can do 
position analysis also. A preliminary analysis of alpha 
scintillation images using single image intensifier tube in 
direct contact with the scintillator shows a resolution of 
about 100 p,m. However, the resolution is dependent on 
several factors such as the mode of optical coupling be- 
tween image intensifier input face plate and scintillator, 
type of scintillator, etc. Fig. 2 shows a ten second inte- 
grated scintillation image of a ring shaped 24’Am alpha 
source. Some stray scintillation in the central and outside 
portion of the ring are due to residual alpha contamination 
during the deposition of americium. 
We have also conducted experiments to detect the 
lower limit of the alpha energy which can be detected in 
A. Sinha et al./ Nucl. Insb. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 1 II (1996) I71 -I 75 
Fig. 3. Images of individual thermal neutron scintillations. 
Fig. 2. Scintillation images of a ring shaped alpha source. 
4.2. Low energy neutron detection: experimental results 
the optical coupling method. For this purpose several 
layers of aluminized mylar foils of thickness about 2 pm 
each were introduced one by one between the scintillator 
and the source in order to reduce the energy of the emitted 
alphas. Alpha particles of energy as low as 0.1 MeV have 
been detected in the optical coupling mode. We have done 
rudimentary charged particle spectroscopy, but more ex- 
periments with a better scintillator are required to calibrate 
the system. This detector system was recently employed as 
a hand held alpha contamination monitor system. 
4. Scintillation imaging of neutrons 
4.1. Converter jilm 
All detectors used to detect, quantify and map neutron 
fields require an intermediate material to convert neutrons 
to an ionizing form of radiation which in turn can be 
detected using suitable scintillators. The converters re- 
quired for thermal neutrons are different from those used 
for fast neutrons. For fast neutrons, charged particles are 
directly produced in some hydrogenous material such as 
plastics which then scintillates. For thermal neutrons, ad- 
vantage is taken of the fact that,some light elements have 
nuclides that undergo exothermic reactions to yield ener- 
getic charged particles which can in turn induce scintilla- 
tions. Many of these neutron to energetic charged particle 
converters have minimal gamma sensitivity and thus are 
ideally suited for detection of neutrons. Two commonly 
used converters having exothermic reactions and high 
cross-sections for thermal neutrons are boron-10 and 
lithium-6. In the initial series of experiments, we used an enriched 
boron-10 coated plate in contact with a ZnS screen which 
in turn was mounted in direct contact .with the input face 
plate of the first image intensifier tube. However it was 
realized that the light output of the scintillator using 
boron-10 and ZnS combination is rather poor and therefore 
in the next series of experiments we employed a scintilla- 
tor NE-426 made up of a mixture of 6Li with ZnS. The 
light output of this scintillator is of the order of 1.7 X lo5 
photons per thermal neutron absorbed. Using this scintilla- 
tor, it is possible to use only a single image intensifier tube 
in contact with the scintillator and obtain neutron images 
trough a CCD camera. Fig. 3 shows one such image using 
NE-426 and a single image intensifier tube using a CCD 
camera. We have developed a hand held neutron monitor 
using a NE-426 scintillator and a single image intensifier 
tube. 
Fig. 4. Radiograph of a Cd sheet with holes of 1, 1.5 and 2 mm. 
114 A. Sinha et al./Nucl. lnstr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 111 (1996) 171-175 
In order to demonstrate the radiographic imaging appli- 
cation using this detector system, we present in Fig. 4 a 
neutron radiographic image of a cadmium sheet with holes 
of 1, 1.5 and 2 mm. This detector system is very much 
suited for low fluence neutron radiography and has been 
employed to obtain qualitative neutron radiographs of both 
hydrogenous objects such as plastic, water and non-hy- 
drogenous objects such as Cd using only a relatively small 
Pu-Be neutron source emitting about 2 X 10’ n/s. 
4.3. Fast neutron imaging 
We have also carried out the feasibility of position 
sensitive detection of fast neutrons using the present detec- 
tor. For this purpose we have used a plastic scintillator. 
Work is in progress on the applications of fast neutron 
imaging using this detector. 
5. Scintillation imaging of X-rays, gamma rays and 
beta particles 
We have also tested this detector for scintillation imag- 
ing of radiations other than alphas and neutrons. For 
imaging of gamma ray photons, the CsI(Tl) scintillator was 
used and for low energy X-rays, the CaFa(Eu) scintillator 
has been used. Depending on the energy of the incident 
radiation, scintillators ranging in thickness from 1.5 to 4 
mm were used for gamma rays. Gamma rays from both 
6oCo and 13’ Cs were also detected. Also the X-rays pho- 
tons emitted from ‘@Cd and “Fe X-ray sources with 
energies of 22 and 5.9 keV respectively have been imaged 
usirrg this technique. The thickness of the CaF,(Eu) scintil- 
lator used in the case of low energy X-rays is 200-300 
p,rn in order to avoid defocusing. A thinner scintillator for 
low energy X-rays will give a better resolution. Fig. 5 
shows one such .&age of individual X-ray photons from a 
Fig. 5. Scintillation images of X-ray photons from io9Cd. Fig. 6. Scintillation images of 90Sr beta using CaF, (Eu). 
‘mCd X-ray source emitting 22 keV X-ray photons. One of 
the interesting applications to which this detector system 
has been applied to is the online imaging of X-ray diffrac- 
tion images. Work is in preliminary stages and details of 
this work will be reported separately. 
Similarly for beta particles both a plastic scintillator 
and a CaF,(Eu) scintillator were employed. We have been 
able to image individual beta scintillations of both low and 
high energy. Fig. 6 shows the image of betas from a “Sr 
source using a CaF$(Eu) detector. However for tritium 
betas of E_ = 18 keV, the signal to noise ratio obtained 
in the present detector-scintillator combination is rather 
poor. Using a CaF,(Eu) scintillator we have been able to 
image spot tritium contamination in titanium samples hav- 
ing an activity of = 1000 Bq in a few seconds of integra- 
tion time. 
6. Conclusions 
A position sensitive scintillation imaging detector sys- 
tem has been developed for online high resolution imaging 
of charged particles, neutrons, X-rays, gamma rays and 
betas. A few preliminary experiments on energy spec- 
troscopy have also beerrcanied out. The detector has good 
spatial resolution and can be adapted for a high dynamic 
range. Among the several applications for this detector, we 
have carried out neutron radiography using a low flux 
neutron source, neutron source imaging, charged particle 
detection containing x-y information, count rate, etc. The 
time resolution, however is limited to 40 ms. It can also be 
used in neutron scattering experiments and beam profile 
monitoring of neutron or charged particle beams. We 
propose to apply this technique for real time neutron 
radiography, neutron tomography and X-ray diffraction 
imaging. 
A. Sinha et al./NucI. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 111 (1996) 171-175 175 
References 
[I] R. Allemand, J. Bourdel, E. Roudaut, P. Convert, K. Abel, J. 
Jacobe, J.P. Cotton and B. Famoux, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 
126 (1975) 29. 
[2] A. Ged, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 263 (1988) 351. 
[3] R.A. Schrac, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 222 (1984) 499. 
[4] H. Kume, S. Muramatsu and M. Iida, IEEE. Trans. Nucl. Sci. 
NS-33 (1986) 359. 
[5] S. Charbomieau, L.B. Allard, J.F. Young, G. Dyck and B.J. 
Kyle, Rev. Sci. Instr. 63(11) (1992) 5315. 
[6] M.G. Strauss, I. Naday, IS. Sherman, M.R. Kraimer and 
E.M. Westbrook, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. NS-34 (1987) 389. [7] P.N. Chemyshov, A.A. Sumbatyan, V.Ya. Kezerashvili, S.P. 
Gaevoi, V.M. Gataulin and V.A. Tumov, Instr. Exper. Tech. 
29 (1986) 1297. 
[S] R.H. Templer, S.M. Gruner and E.F. Eikenberry, Adv. Elec- 
tronics and Electron Physics 17 (1988) 275. 
[9] U.W. Amdt, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 201 (1982) 13. 
[lo] U.W. Amdt and D.J. Gilmore, BNL-50453 (1982) VIII-16. 
[ll] D. Kella, M. Algrauati, H. Feidman, O.H. Eber, I-I. Kovner, 
E. Malkin, E. Miklazky, R. Naaman, D. Zajfman, J. Zajfiuan 
and Z. Vager, Nucl. Iustr. and Meth. A 329 (1993) 440. 
[12] A. Sinha, B.D. Bhawe, C.G. Panchal, A. Shyam and M. 
Srinivasan, Symp. on Nuclear Physics, Bhubaneshwar, India, 
1994. 
