Vacuum/volume 47lnumbers 6-8jpages 697 to 700/1996 
Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved Pergamon 
PII: SOO42-207X(96)00050-4 0042-207X/56 $15.00+.00 
Hydrogen permeation properties and surface structure 
of BN-coated stainless steel membrane 
A Itakura,* M Tosa, S lkeda and K Yoshihara, National Research institute for Metals, l-2-7, Sengen, 
Tsukuba 305, Japan 
We developed boron nitride-coated stainless steel for vacuum vessel materials, with low adsorption rate of 
oxygen and carbonates. In extremely high vacuum, of a range 70-lo Pa, the main component of the residual 
gas is hydrogen. We found a low adsorption rate of hydrogen on the surface of precipitated BN. A precipitated 
BN layer can also lower the hydrogen permeation rate of a stainless steel membrane. BN-coating has an 
effect on the reduction of outgassing due to, not only adsorbed hydrogen on the surface of vessel materials, 
but also contained hydrogen in vessel materials. We successfully coated BN on a stainless steel surface by 
using surface segregation from BN and the stainless steel co-deposited film. The RHEED pattern of BN showed 
the diffraction rings and spots of hexagonal-BN which has its C-axis orientated to the surface normal. The 
image using transmission electron microscopy showed a lattice of h-BN basal plane, and that the diameter 
of the BN crystals was 50-80 nm. This crystal structure inhibited hydrogen permeation. Copyright 0 7996 
Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. 
Introduction 
The demand for extremely high vacuum systems is increasing, 
especially in the field of surface analysis and thin film preparation 
technology. Two major performances are necessary to build and 
maintain an XHV system. One is a high pumping speed of vac- 
uum pumps and the other is a low outgassing rate of the material 
surface which composes the vacuum system. Many pumps have 
been developed with improved pumping speed. Outgassing has 
been reduced by new materials for a vacuum system and surface 
treatments such as surface polishing,’ TIN coating,’ oxide layer’ 
and so on. It is considered that the origins of outgassing are (1) 
desorption of adsorbed molecules stuck on material surfaces. 
(2) evolution of occluded atoms and/or molecules in chamber 
materials and components, and (3) permeation of atoms from 
the outside through materials. We have developed boron nitride 
(BN)-coated stainless steel for vacuum vessel materials. with low 
adsorption rate and low outgassing rate of oxygen and carbon- 
ates.4 Hydrogen is the main component of the residual gas in 
extreme high vacuum of IO--“’ Pa range. Therefore, our objective 
in this study is to establish a suitable surface treatment technique 
which can reduce the hydrogen outgassing rate considering the 
evolution of occluded atoms (2) and the permeation of atoms (3). 
* .4kiko Itakura, National Research Institute for Metals, I-2-1. Sengen, 
Tsukuba 305. Japan. Tel: 0298-53-I 184. Fax: 0298-53-I 199. Experimental 
BN-coating. BN-coating layer on a stainless steel surface was 
prepared by using surface segregation. The segregation of BN 
was found on the surface of B and N doped stainless steel.’ In 
this study, we use a BN layer which segregated on the surface of 
deposited film. Type 304 stainless steel and BN was the co- 
deposit on type 304 stainless steel substrate with RF magnetron 
sputtering. After annealing in a vacuum, B and N segregate on 
the surface of the film and combine to form BN. BN was detected 
from the line-shape of an Auger spectrum, with a shoulder of B 
peak.6 BN thickness can be controlled by deposit thickness and 
annealing temperature. 
Hydrogen adsorption and desorption. We observed an adsorption 
rate of hydrogen on a BN-coated surface and a non-coated stain- 
less steel surface using an electron stimulated desorption (ESD) 
experiment. Figure 1 (a) shows an image of a partly coated stain- 
less steel sample from scanning electron microscopy. The right 
side is the BN coated area and the left side stainless steel. Figure 
l(b) shows ESD mapping of H+ ions which is measured in IO-’ 
Pa hydrogen atmosphere. Light points are desorbed ions. Com- 
paring part (b) with (a), it is shown that the stainless steel side is 
bright, the BN side is dark and the boundary shape of the dark 
area is very similar to the shape of the BN-coated area. BN has 
a low adsorption rate of H similar to the case of low adsorption 
rate of oxygen and carbonates. The thermal desorption spec- 
troscopy (TDS) experiment showed that H2 desorption from BN 
697 
A lfakura et a/: BN-coated stainless steel membrane 
I 1 I I I I I I I stainless steel : BN coated area I 
I 
I I 
:, stainless steel i BN coated area ; 
P 
Figure 1. (a) SEM image of half coated stainless steel surface. BN coating 
area is shown on the right side and (b) ESD mapping of H+ ions. 
coated stainless steel was lower than H, desorption from non- 
coated stainless steel.7 
Hydrogen permeation. We observed the permeation rate of hydro 
gen through a BN-coated stainless steel membrane. Permeation 
rates were determined by the change in hydrogen pressure in a 
vacuum chamber with a membrane wall dividing the chamber 
into two rooms. Two rooms can be pumped separately. After 
heating the membrane with an IR heater, purified hydrogen gas 
was introduced into one room called the high pressure room, and 
hydrogen pressure was measured in the other room called the 
low pressure room with a quadrupole mass spectrometer. Then 
the low pressure room was pumped through an orifice. We cal- 
culated diffusion coefficients from a line-shape of the change in 
hydrogen pressure in the low pressure room, which showed the 
time delay between the time of hydrogen introduction into the 
high pressure room and the time of pressure saturation in the 
low pressure room. Diffusion coefficients of BN-coated stainless 
steel membranes are equivalent to non-coated stainless steel 
membranes, in the range 1-3 x lo-” m’js. Figure 2 shows the 
variation of the hydrogen permeability of BN-coated stainless 
698 1 o-4 
t 0 : sus 304 
0 . : SUS 304 + BN 1Onm 
0 : SUS 304 + BN 20nm 
0 : SUS 304 + BN 30nm 
0 
0 
. 
I 
1.5 
Reciprocal temp. 1 03/T (K-‘) 
Figure 2. Hydrogen permeability with reciprocal temperature of 
membrane. 0: Non-coated stainless steel (SUS304) membrane, n : BN 
coated stainless steel membrane. BN thickness is 10 nm, 0: BN thickness 
is 20 nm, q : BN thickness is 30 nm. 
steel and the hydrogen permeability of non-coated stainless steel 
membranes with reciprocal temperature. In this series of experi- 
ments, BN-coated surfaces face the low pressure room. Coated 
BN on stainless steel lowers the permeability of hydrogen at each 
temperature, and the lowering effect does not depend on the BN 
thickness from 10 to 30 nm. Activation energies of permeation 
are not due to BN thickness, and this agrees well with non-coated 
membranes.’ Figure 3 shows the variation of permeability of BN- 
coated stainless steel. One membrane has a BN layer facing the 
low pressure room and the other has a BN layer facing the high 
0 0 : SUS 304 
. : SUS 304 + EN low p. 
0 : SUS 304 + BN high p. 
0 
. 
0 
. . O 0 
. 
0 
. 
. . 
. . 
. 0 
. 
. 
I I 
1.0 1.5 
Reciprocal temp. lO’/T (K-l) 
Figure 3. Hydrogen permeability with reciprocal temperature of 
membrane. O:Non-coated stainless steel (SUS304) membrane, n : BN 
coated stainless steel membrane. BN thickness is 20 nm and BN layer 
faces towards the low pressure room, 0: BN thickness is 20 nm and BN 
layer faces towards the high pressure room. 
A ltakura et al: BN-coated stainless steel membrane 
Fig :ure 4. RHEED pattern obtained for the boron nitride segregated la .yer 
r&n co-deposited‘fihn on stainless steel (SUS304). - - 
lressure room. The BN layer facing towards the high pressure 
oom slightly lowers hydrogen permeability, but the lowering 
e ffect is smaller than that due to the BN layer facing the low 
pressure room. Diffusion coefficient and activation energy of 
permeation are similar to turned over membranes and non-coated 
membranes. It must be discussed carefully to compare different 
directions of hydrogen diffusion. We disregard a low sticking 
probability of hydrogen on the BN layer facing the high pressure 
gas (see Figure I). 
Structure of BN segregated layer. A diffraction study revealed that 
the hexagonal boron nitride layers had the preferred orientation 
and tended to cover the segregated surface with their basal plane 
(001). In Figure 4 the RHEED pattern (electron energy = 50 kV) 
of BN segregated layer shows very weak diffraction rings and 
strong spots ordering by mirror reflection. The diffraction rings 
of the polycrystal come from h-BN crystals and ordered spots 
shows (OOn) refraction from the h-BN basal plane of the C-axis 
orientated to the surface normal. Figure 5(a) is an image from 
transmission electron microscopy (electron energy = 400 kV) of 
BN segregated layer. The sample was prepared by chemical etch- 
ing from the reverse side of the BN segregated layer, and the BN 
layer was coated with the inert resin. The image shown in Figure 
5(a) gives two kinds of grains, gray grains and striped grains. 
Each diameter is measured as being 50-80 nm. In Figure 5(b), a 
lattice picture of a gray grain indicated as A in Figure 5(a), clearly 
shows sixth symmetry. If the lattice points are dark spots, the 
lattice constant is 2.5 *O. 1 A. The constant is in good agreement 
with the lattice constant in the h-BN basal plane. The structure 
of the B grain was not determined. A characteristic X-ray shows 
that B, N and stainless steel materials are contained in the B 
grain, which suggests that the BN crystal could not cover the 
surface perfectly and so co-deposited film remained in the surface. 
Result and discussion 
A BN-coated layer on stainless steel reduced the permeability of 
hydrogen but the diffusion constants and activation energies of 
permeation are similar to the constant and energy of non-coated 
stainless steel. What is a reduction mechanism of hydrogen out- 
gassing from the BN surface? If BN has a smaller diffusion 
coefficient than stainless steel, the permeability decreases. 
However, the lowering effect is not proportional to the BN thick- 
ness. We try to explain the permeating phenomena and lowering Figure 5. (a) TEM image of BN segregated layer and (b) Lattice image 
of gray grain pointed out as A in part (a). 
effect of BN layer in the following mechanism. Hydrogen mol- 
ecules dissolve into stainless steel as hydrogen atoms from the 
high pressure side and atomic H goes through grain and/or grain 
boundary of stainless steel. Diffusion coefficients and activation 
energies are determined by the substrate stainless steel. Then 
atomic hydrogen reached the BN segregated area. We suppose 
that atomic hydrogen can dissolve into the BN layer but orien- 
tated h-BN surface prevents the recombination of hydrogen 
atoms to molecular hydrogen. Hydrogen molecules which had 
permeated a BN-coated membrane, permeated only through a 
BN lacking area or a large grain boundary of BN grains. 
Summary 
We developed BN-coated stainless steel for vacuum vessel 
materials with low adsorption rate not only of oxygen and car- 
bonates but also of hydrogen. Moreover BN-coating has an effect 
on reduction of outgassing due to not only adsorbed hydrogen 
on the surface but also hydrogen contained in vessel materials. 
Hydrogen permeability of BN-coated stainless steel was one 
order lower than the permeability of non-coated stainless steel 
though the diffusion constants and activation energies of per- 
meation were similar to non-coated stainless steel. The structure 
of a segregated BN layer is polycrystalline hexagonal-BN with 
699 
A ltekura et al: BN-coated stainless steel membrane 
the C-axis orientated to the surface normal. This crystal structure 
of BN offers low hydrogen permeability. 
References 
‘A Mutoh, Y Hirohata, T Hino, T Yamashina, T Kikuchi and N Ohsako, 
J Vuc Sot Jpn, 37, 173 (1994) (in Japanese). 
‘Y Ikeda, K Saitoh, S Inayoshi and S Tukamoto, J Vat Sot Jpn, 37,232 
( 1994) (in Japanese). ‘Y Ishikawa, S Ohkido and T Yoshimura, J Vat Sot Jpn, 37, 176 
(1994). 
“M Tosa, M Yoshitake and K Yoshihara, J Vat Sot Jpn, 34, 62 (1991) 
(in Japanese). 
‘K Yoshihara, M Tosa and K Nii, J Vuc Sci Technol, A3, 1804 (1985). 
‘M Tosa and K Yoshihara, J Vuc Sot Jpn, 33, 520 (1990). 
‘A Itakura, M Tosa and K Yoshihara, J Vuc Sot Jpn, 37,240 (1994) (in 
Japanese). 
‘A Itakura, M Tosa and K Yoshihara, J Vuc Sot Jpn, 37, 793 (1994). 
700 
