Vacuum/volume 47lnumbers 6-W/pages 7017 to 1022/1996 
Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All riahts reserved Pergamon 
PII: SOO42-207X(96)OOll!b7 0042-207X/i6 $15.00+.00 
Time resolved analysis of ion motion in an oscillating 
plasma sheath 
D Martin and H Oechsner, Department of Physics and Center of Materials Research, University of 
Kaiserslautern, Erwin-Schroedinger_Stra/3e, D-67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany 
The ion extraction mechanism based on the self-biasing effect resulting from an RF voltage between a low 
pressure plasma and an electrode in contact with the plasma is studied using detailed computer simulations. 
The results from the simulations are compared with corresponding measurements. In particular, the influence 
of the frequency of the RF extraction voltage and the ion mass on the energy distribution of the extracted ion 
flux are investigated. The simulation of the ion kinetics in the oscillating plasma sheath in front of the electrode 
is shown to provide a detailed understanding of the respective ion acceleration mechanism. The simulation 
results supply useful information for the selection of favorable operation conditions, e.g. for establishing a 
uniform energy of the extracted plasma ions. Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd. 
Key words: Computer simulation of ion motion, ion energy distributions, plasma sheath effects, RF based ion 
extraction. 
Introduction 
The self-biasing effect of an electrode carrying an RF potential 
against a surrounding plasma has been well known as an inter- 
esting phenomenon in low pressure gas discharges for some 
time.‘.’ Its early utilization for the bombardment of electrically 
insulated or dielectric targets by plasma ions has tremendously 
fostered the evolution of ion sputtering towards the most uni- 
versal PVD method in thin film technology.3,4 More recently 
the self-biasing process has been utilized for the production of 
monoenergetic and completely charge compensated large area 
ion beams.’ ’ In the respective plasma beam sources, an RF 
potential is applied to an arbitrarily excited low pressure plasma. 
Then, an ion accelerating self-bias voltage U,, develops between 
the plasma and a favorably grounded extraction electrode. The 
saturation current of monoenergetic ions which Us, causes to 
leave the plasma is precisely compensated for by short pulses of 
an electron retardation current which periodically superimpose 
the ion current when the potential of the plasma approaches that 
of the extraction electrode once in each RF period. RF plasma 
beam sources of that type have been successfully employed for 
the deposition of diamond-like carbon8 or titanium nitride films.’ 
The same extraction method has been used for a plasma based 
technique for controlled low energy ion bombardment of dielec- 
tric surfaces.“’ In the respective apparatus, a capacitive RF 
circuit, consisting of the insulating target and a counterelectrode, 
is superimposed onto a cylindrical plasma column excited by 
electron cyclotron wave resonance.” An RF based ion extraction 
method is also employed for surface and depth profile analysis of insulating specimens by e-gas Secondary Neutral Mass Spec- 
trometry (SNMS) in the so-called High Frequency Mode of 
SNMS.” 
When such a system, or low energy RF plasma beam sources 
are employed to solve demanding tasks such as, for instance, the 
removal of leached surface layers from oxidic glasses’” or the 
exact texturing of surface coatings.” a detailed understanding of 
the RF based ion extraction mechanism is mandatory. While the 
control of the height of the self-biasing voltage U,, via the area 
of the RF carrying electrodes has been discussed by several 
authors,” ” detailed studies of the ion acceleration in the oscil- 
lating space charge sheath in front of the extraction electrode are 
still lacking to our knowledge. The present study was intended 
to fill this gap by a computer simulation of the corresponding ion 
acceleration processes, particularly as a function of the applied 
frequency and ion mass. The computer simulations will be com- 
pared with experimental results obtained for the plasma extrac- 
tion system mentioned above.“’ 
Experimental 
The plasma system at which the RF plasma extraction process 
has been studied experimentally as a function of the relevant 
operation parameters contains two RF circuits. One of them 
serves for the plasma excitation by electron cyclotron wave res- 
onance.” For that purpose, a cylindrical glass vessel is sur- 
rounded by a single turn antenna coil coupled to a 27.12 MHz 
RF generator of 200 W. To establish ECWR conditions a weak, 
1017 
D Martin and H OechsnecTime resolved analysis of ion motion 
steady magnetic field of the order of 25 Gauss is superimposed 
in a transverse direction to the axis of the plasma vessel (height 
10 cm, diameter 12 cm). Resonant plasma excitation is 
accomplished by a right-handed circularly polarized wave prop- 
agating into the plasma parallel to the superimposed magnetic 
field. The ECWR plasma has been operated with the different 
noble gases (He, Ne, Ar, Kr and Xe) at pressures in the range 
from 10m4 to 10P2 mbar. For the ion and electron extraction via 
the self-biasing effect a second capacitive RF circuit is super- 
imposed onto the ECWR plasma. This extraction circuit is oper- 
ated at frequencies from 2 to 125 MHz. It consists of a coupling 
electrode connected to the tunable RF generator by a matching 
network, and a retarding field analyzer which replaced the target 
to be treated by the extracted plasma ions. The analyzer enables a 
separation of the ion and the electron component in the extracted 
plasma flux and measurements of the ion energy distributions 
by the retarding field technique. In the subsequent sections the 
entrance grid of the analyzer replacing the surface of the ion 
bombarded sample is addressed as a “target electrode”. More 
details of the experimental arrangement are found elsewhere.‘0,‘5 
Simulation algorithm 
The potential distribution sketched in Figure 1 is intended to 
serve as the background for a short explanation of the computer 
algorithm which has been developed to describe the ion motion in 
the RF based plasma extraction system. We distinguish between a 
pre-sheath ranging from the center of the plasma vessel to the 
edge of the space charge sheath (“plasma sheath”) in front of the 
target electrode. d,,,.,, assigns the maximum thickness of the 
plasma sheath. The potential 4 in the pre-sheath, i.e. in the quasi- 
neutral plasma region, is assumed to vary as z2 ’ according to the 
results from previous experimental studies of an identical ECWR 
plasma.“’ During the operation the actual plasma edge varies 
periodically between d,,,,, and a minimum thickness d,,,;, with the 
frequency&, applied to the capacitive extraction circuit. 
The ions being individually considered in the simulation are 
Plasma sheath 
region 
+W A’ L 1 t 
b& 0 1 
Figure 1. Schematic of the plasma potential distribution in the pre-sheath 
q(z) and in the plasma sheath q(s) as a function of the distance from the 
center of the plasma vessel (z) and the plasma sheath boundary (s), 
respectively. 
1018 assumed to start along the z-axis with a thermal energy E,,, = 30 
meV. Each ion is accelerated by the local electric field, i.e. the 
spatial variation of the plasma potential in the pre-sheath. The 
ion motion through the pre-sheath and the plasma sheath is then 
traced up to the plane of the target electrode. In the pre-sheath 
the time intervals for subsequent acceleration steps are chosen 
such that the energy gain is < 10-l eV. Since the ion is assumed 
to keep its local velocity by which it enters the corresponding 
interval AZ, the potential drop along each individual step AZ 
determines the kinetic energy within the next interval. As soon 
as an ion arrives at a,,,,,, the maximum step width AZ is reduced 
to 10m4 of the actual sheath thickness in order to get a sufficient 
spatial resolution for the acceleration process in the plasma 
sheath. 
During the ion motion from its point of origin towards the 
target electrode both gas kinetic and charge exchange collisions 
with other heavy plasma species are considered. An elastic (gas 
kinetic) collision is assumed to occur on average when the particle 
has travelled a distance corresponding to the mean free path for 
elastic atom-atom collisions. In the respective travelling distances 
of an ion the path before its ionization is included. It should be 
noted that, according to the experimental conditions, the mean 
free path is of the order of the length of the pre-sheath. The 
energy loss by an elastic collision is determined by a random 
generator which is asked for its present value at each collision. 
For the mean free path of charge exchange collisions the energy 
dependence of the respective cross section is taken into account 
for the noble gas under consideration. Each ion generated by 
charge exchange is assumed to start again with Et,, = 30 meV. 
The individual cycles for the traveling intervals are repeated 
until the ion reaches the plane of maximum extension of the 
plasma sheath, i.e. arrives at z = L/2-d,,, (L is the height of the 
plasma cylinder). The total potential drop UPlasma between the 
plasma and the target electrode is split up into the constant self- 
biasing voltage U,, and the superimposed high frequency voltage 
URF with the amplitude fi,,: 
u plasma = Us, + URF = Us, + ii,, * sin (~,,~t + SJ 
hi refers to the phase angle for any ion i when it enters the plasma 
sheath region at z = L/2 -d,,,, and ocaP is 2 nfcap. When Q defines 
the phase angle of URF at that instant, Q becomes equal to 6, 
when the entry time t is put equal to zero for each ion i. The 
frequency fclp and the ion velocity at t = 0 determine the time 
tkgin at which an ion i passes the actual plasma sheath edge for 
the first time. The difference between 0 = ~,,~t,_+6, and Q 
yields the respective flight time of the considered ion i. 
The potential within the plasma sheath of a time-dependent 
thickness d(t) is assumed to vary proportionally to s4:’ according 
to the well known Langmuir-Schottky law. The ion motion in 
the plasma sheath is traced along individual path elements As 
with a maximum length of 10m4 d(t) along the sheath coordinate 
s (Figure 1). After each acceleration step As the simulation pro- 
gram checks whether the ion remains in the plasma sheath or is 
overtaken by its regressing boundary. In the latter case, the ion 
is assumed to move on with its actual velocity without additional 
energy gain. When the ion remains in the plasma sheath, an 
identical calculation loop as in the pre-sheath is applied but 
with the actual potential distribution in the oscillating sheath. 
The calculation ends when the ion reaches the position of the 
target electrode at z = L/2 at a time tend, i.e. at a phase angle 
y = &,p fend + 4. 
D Martin and H 0echsner:Time resolved analysis of ion motion 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
U ret [VI 
0 10 20 30 40 50 6b 7b 
E Lo" [W 
Figure 2. Comparison between experiment (symbols) and calculation 
(lines) of retarding field curves (a) and ion energy distributions (b) for 
ions with a mean energy of about 40 eV. Ion extraction from an Ar- 
plasma for different frequencies in the capacitive RF circuit (f,,, = 2.0, 
10.5, 125.0 MHz). The normalized results are given in arbitrary units 
(w.E.). 
Simulation results and comparison with experiment 
A direct comparison between the results from the measurements 
with the retarding field analyzer and the respective computer 
simulations, is displayed in Figure 2 for different operation fre- 
quencies &,, of the capacitive extraction circuit. Retarding field 
curves for ion extraction from an Ar-plasma are shown in Figure 
2(a) for threej&-values. We define a nominal ion energy E,,, by 
the retarding voltage U,,, where the ion retardation current has 
dropped down to 50% of its initial saturation value. In all cases 
depicted in Figure 2, the amplitude ii,, of the extracting high 
frequency voltage has been chosen such that Ei,, becomes 40 eV. 
The width AE,,, of the ion energy distribution is defined as that 
interval of Ii,,, across which the retardation current decreases 
from 84 to 16%. AE,,, becomes narrower with increasing fre- 
quency .& both for the experimental and the simulated results. 
In the lower panel of Figure 2 the experimental ion distributions 
derived from the retarding field measurements are compared with 
the results from the computer algorithm. Both sets of results 
agree quite well. In particular, the splitting of the energy dis- 
tributions with decreasing fcap is well reproduced by the simu- 
lation curves. 
In Figure 3, the AE,,,-values from a larger number of retar- 
dation curves, always measured for AT+-ions with a nominal ion 
3~ yl,I ,..p.,, ‘, ....,., 1 
I 10 100 
f car, [MHz1 
Figure 3. Ion energy width A&, vs the frequency of the capacitive extrac- 
tion circuit for ions with E,,, = 40 eV (a: experiment; 0: simulation). energy E,,, of 40 eV, are plotted vs the frequencies .fcap in the 
extraction circuit. Again a satisfactory agreement between the 
experimental and the simulated data is obtained. In particular, 
an fZ!i of about 16 MHz at which AE,,, attains a constant low 
level around only 5 eV is extracted from Figure 3. As an impor- 
tant result from the computer simulations it is found that the Ar+- 
ions experience just two field oscillations during their acceleration 
towards the target electrode for ,&, = ,r:,$ ‘u 16 MHz in the 
present case. 
When the ECWR discharge is operated with the other noble 
gases, an identical behavior is derived from the corresponding 
measurements of BE,,, as a function of,&, and from the respec- 
tive computer simulations. In all cases the measured and the 
simulated values f$ for which AE,,,, approaches a frequency 
independent low level are found to coincide surprisingly well. 
AEi,, above .f cap c”t is of the order of 4-5 eV for the heavier noble 
gas ions and around 10 eV for Net and He+. Such AE,,,-values 
agree well with the width of the potential drop AU,,, across the 
pre-sheath, i.e. in the quasi-neutral plasma regime. According 
to previous studies AU,, 2 0.6 kT, for the employed ECWR 
discharges.lh 
Again the computer simulations for the different types of noble 
gas ions reveal that the f$A values refer to such ion travelling 
times through the plasma sheath which correspond to two field 
oscillations. The respective measurements have been performed 
for almost identical ion saturation current densities leaving the 
ECWR plasma. Hence, for the plane geometry of the present 
extraction system the relation 
s2 - M*;n”*P(S) (2) 
is valid according to the Schottky-Langmuir equation. 
Correspondingly the ion accelerating field E in the sheath var- 
ies with 
(3) 
By integrating the respective equation of the ion motion, the total 
ion travelling time t(d) of an ion through a plasma sheath of 
thickness d produced by a sheath voltage U is readily found to 
be proportional to A4kz5 when the ion velocity at the sheath 
entrance is neglected. The low ion energy width BEion (or uniform 
E,,,) reached for f f:i in the present experiments and computer 
simulations, suggest that eqns (2) and (3) can be used as a simple 
approximation for the conditions in the investigated RF extrac- 
tion system at fcap = f Srk. Since an identical ion energy E,,, of 40 
eV has always been established by a proper selection of the RF 
amplitude at the extraction circuit, a constant sheath voltage can 
be assumed at f :$ for the acceleration of the different noble gas 
ions. Hence, the effective ion travelling time through the plasma 
sheath which corresponds to two RF periods according to com- 
puter simulations should vary with I@,:‘, or vice versa, ,Jz$ 
should be proportional to Mi;:.25. A corresponding plot of the 
experimental ,fszk values, being confirmed by the computer 
simulations, is presented in Figure 4. Across the mass range 
accessible by the different noble gas ions. ,/‘::A is found to vary 
linearly with Ml;:.” within the error bars of the individual.f’:,‘A 
values. The behaviour in Figure 4 is also of considerable practical 
importance, since it enables the prediction of the minimum oper- 
ation frequency for which the ion extraction with uniform E,,, is 
achieved for the RF based ion extraction from a plasma. A 
numerical formula for f ~$(M,,,) is inserted in Figure 4 for the 
present case. 
D Martin and H Oechsnec Time resolved analysis of ion motion 
lo- yt[rAr j,O, y 3 mAem-* _ 
E,,, g 40 eV . 
01 I I I . ’ 
w 02 0,4 076 
Figure 4. Critical frequency values f:G according to Figure 
different kinds of noble gas ions vs M,;/. 3 for the 
An even more detailed understanding of the ion extraction 
process is obtained from the discussion of the correlations with 
the phase angles 0, 0 and Y introduced in Section 3. By simu- 
lating the ion motion in the plasma sheath, the final energy E,,, 
is obtained as a function of 0. Corresponding results for four 
different frequencies fcap (1.0, 4.0, 10.5 and 125.0 MHz) are 
depicted in Figure 5. The oscillation of the potential drop between 
the plasma and the target electrode, as well as that of the sheath 
thickness, is reflected by the periodic variation of E,,, for low 
frequencies (Figure 5(a)). Since the ion velocity built up in the 
pre-sheath is in that case higher than the veiocity h(t) with which 
the plasma boundary moves, the ions can enter the plasma sheath 
even when it passes through its minimum thickness d,i” (at 
0 = 270” in Figure 5). Hence, the variation of E,,, reflects that 
of the total RF voltage across the plasma sheath. The behaviour 
of Eion (0) changes for higher&. Then d(t) is above v,,, at d,,, 
and no ions can enter the accelerating plasma sheath in an O- 
regime around O(d,i”). For high values off,,, (Figure 5(c) and 
140, , , 140, , , 
120 
100 I 
E SO- 
S 60 
w 40. 
20. (a) few = I .O MHz 120. 
B “, e” LOO- 
0 
0 d : so! 0 
O . 60. 
.p 
: 40. 
- 20. (b) f_,= 
Ok------ O-0 90 180 270 360 450 
140 
120 
100 
g *O 
6 60 
w- 
40 
20 
0 (c) f_, = 10.5 MHz 
4 
90 180 270 360 450 
@ [“I 140 
120 (d) f_, = 125.0 MHz 
loo 
80 
I-----I P 
60 
40 q 
0 
20 n 
OJ 0 1 0 90 180 270 360 450 
@ [“I 
Figure 5. Energy of Arc-ions at the target electrode vs the phase angle 0 
of the RF voltage for the first entry of an ion into the plasma sheath 
cf,,, = 1.0, 4.0, 10.5 and 125.0 MHz). simulation. Ar - plasma 
E...=“7OeV 
0 60 180 270 360 
@ [“I 
Figure 6. Number of RF oscillations during the ion flight time through 
the plasma sheath region for Art-ions with an average energy of 70 eV 
as a function of the RF phase angle @ for the entry of an ion into the 
plasma sheath region (& = 1.0, 4.0, 10.5, 30.0 and 125.0 MHz). 
(d)), i.e. for Uion < d(t), the incoming ions are touched by the 
plasma sheath only at such O-values where it reaches its 
maximum thickness d,,,. Since the ions experience a sufficiently 
high number of field changes for high j&,, their energy E,,, 
attained across the oscillating sheath approaches a uniform value 
(70 eV under the simulation conditions of Figure 5). 
The number I of RF cycles which the ions experience in the 
plasma sheath region is determined by the difference between the 
two phase angles Q, and Y. As can be seen in Figure 6, I increases 
for ions with a mean energy E,,, = 70 eV (as referring to the 
results in Figure 5) from about 0.06 up to 0.5 for&, = I MHz 
to about 10-20 at 125 MHz. For low frequencies, I depends 
strongly on the phase angle @ under which an ion enters the 
plasma sheath region. Forf,,, = 4 MHz a sudden rise of I occurs 
at @ = 90”. While for that frequency the plasma boundary moves 
towards the arriving plasma ions for @ < 90” and @ > 270”, it 
leaves the ions behind for 90” < @ < 270”. With fiaP in the 10 
MHz regime, such effects disappear because of the increasing 
number of field oscillations experienced by the travelling ions. 
In contrast to Figure 5 where the ion energy E,,, is shown as a 
function of the phase angle 0 at which an ion “feels” the acce- 
lerating field in the plasma sheath for the first time, Figure 7 
displays the ion energy against the phase angle ‘I’ under which 
the ions arrive at the target electrode. The simulation reveals a 
strong f,,,-dependence of the relation between Ei,” and ‘I”. For 
lowf,,,-values E,,, again becomes sensitive to the variation of the 
potential drop between the plasma and the target electrode. In 
contrast, for very high&,, (125 MHz, Figure 7(d)) E,,, is inde- 
pendent of Y. This is again a consequence of the large number 
of RF cycles which an ion passes through during its acceleration 
period. 
The density of the simulated data points in Figure 7 describes 
the variation of the ion current density onto the target electrode. 
Quite obviously for 1 MHz a Y- (or time-) independent ion 
current arrives at the electrode. This is also achieved for very 
high frequencies (e.g. for,f,,, = 125 MHz). However, for medium 
frequencies as 4 MHz, the point density gap in the Y-interval of 
18&360° indicates a significant variation of the ion current den- 
sity onto the target electrode during each RF period. A time 
modulation of the ion current density may be of some dis- 
advantage for certain applications because of the periodically 
interrupted ion bombardment of a target. 
1020 
D Martin and H Oechsner: Time resolved analysis of ion motion 
B 60 
w 
40 
0 90 180 270 360 0 90 180 270 360 
'y ["l YJ [“I 
Figure 7. Ar+-Energy at the target electrode vs the RF phase angle Y for 
the ion arrival at the target surface (j&, = 1.0, 4.0, 7.5 and 125.0 MHz). 
The interval of missing ions in Figure 7(b) can be referred to 
the results in Figure 5(b): the respective O-gap for which no 
plasma ions enter the accelerating sheath translates into the Y- 
gap in Figure 7(b). Since the ions experience less than one field 
oscillation under such conditions, a mean ion energy above that 
for very low&,-values becomes visible from the results in Figure 
5, too. This is also depicted in Figure 8(a), which simultaneously 
shows that uniform Eton (and minimum BE,,,) is achieved for 
frequencies referring to I-numbers above two (see panel b in 
Figure 8). As an additional detail of the simulation of the ion 
motion in the oscillating plasma sheath, the average ion flight 
time across the maximum sheath thickness d,,, is presented in 
Figure 8(c). The residence time in the sheath region decreases 
significantly with j&, and reaches a constant low level around 
0.1 0 ” 
1 I IO 100 
E simulatmn~ 
Ar- plasma 
d'423wm 
I 
z x-3 
c 100 +WWZSAAA&A*AAA 
I IO 100 
f cap [MHz1 
Figure 8. Average ion energy E,,, and ion energy width A&,,, at the target 
electrode (a) number I of RF cycles experienced by an ion during its path 
through the plasma sheath region (b) and average ion flight time in the 
plasma sheath region (c) as a function of the frequency&, in the RF 
extraction circuit. 360 . I I ..,. ~ 
tb) f, =40MHz 
270 2701 
& 180 I80 
b 
90 90 
0 0 
0 90 180 270 360 0 90 180 270 
j f, .n,, :, ,oj jcnn.9 o,n =;I 
0 90 180 270 360 0 90 180 270 360 
@ ("1 a I”1 
Figure 9. Correlation between the phase angles CD and Y’ for ,& = I .O, 
4.0. 10.5 and 125.0 MHz. 
100 ns for&, > 10 MHz for acceleration until an ion energy of 
70 eV. 
Finally, in Figure 9 the dependence between the two phase 
angles @ and Y under which the ions enter the sheath and arrive 
at the target electrode, respectively, is depicted again for 
fcap = 1 .O, 4.0, 10.5 and 125 MHz. A strong correlation between 
these two phase angles exists for the lower frequencies, but is still 
visible for some angle regimes at 10 MHz. However, for high 
frequencies (e.g. for fcap = 125 MHz) no correlation between 9, 
and Y exists anymore. This again indicates that a constant ion 
current reaches the electrode, since a sufficient number 1 of field 
changes experienced by an accelerated ion blurs the correlation 
between the entrance and the exit phase angles, Q, and Y (Figure 
9(d)). 
Conclusions 
The present studies demonstrate that computer simulations are 
an appropriate means for a detailed understanding of the 
dynamic behavior of plasma ions even in such a complicated 
situation as the ion acceleration in an oscillating plasma sheath. 
Once the validity of the simulated behavior has been cor- 
roborated by a comparison with the results from corresponding 
experiments, the simulation can be used to supply details of 
the ion kinetics which are not accessible experimentally. The 
respective simulation data contribute not only to an increased 
understanding of the RF ion extraction mechanism studied in 
the present investigations, but also provide useful information 
helping to select appropriate operation parameters, as for 
instance the minimum frequencies ,f:yi being mandatory for the 
extraction of ions of uniform energy. 
References 
‘F Schneider, Z AngeM; Phys, 6, 456 (1954). 
‘H Fetz and H Oechsner, Z Anger Phys, 12, 250 (1960). 
‘G S Anderson, W N Mayer and G K Wehner, J Appl Phys, 33, 2991 
(1962). 
“P D Davidse and L I Maissel, J Appl Phys, 37, 574 (1966). 
1021 
D Martin and H OechsnecTime resolved analysis of ion motion 
‘H Oechsner, H J Ftiger, J Waldorf and A Fuchs, in Plasma Surface ‘F R Weber and H Oechsner, Surf Coating Technol, 59, 273 (1993). 
Engineering I, (Eds) E Broszeit, W D Miinz, H Oechsner, K T Rie and “‘D Martin and H Oechsner, Surf Coating Technol, 59, 239 (1993). 
G K Wolf). DGM-Verlag, Oberursel(l989). “H Oechsner, Plasma Physics, 16, 835 (1974). 
6H Oechsner, Deutsches Bundespatent DE 3708717Al (1988). 12H Oechsner, Appl Surf Sci, 70/71, 250 (1993). 
‘5 Waldorf, H Oechsner, H J Fiiger and J Mathuni, Thin Solid Films, “H R Koenig and L I Maissel, IBM J Res Develop, 14, 168 (1970). 
174, 39 (1989). 14S Maniv, J AppZ Phys, 63, 1022 (1988). 
‘J Kessler, B Tomcik, J Waldorf and H Oechsner, Vucuum, 42, 273 “D Martin, Doctorate thesis, University of Kaiserslautern (1993). 
(1991). 16H Oechsner, Z Phys, 238,433 (1970). 
1022 
