Corrosion Science, Vol. 38, No. 8, pp. 1331-1356, 1996 
Copyright 0 1996 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved 
001&938X/96 %15.00+0.00 
PII: SOOlO-938X(96)00023-6 
THE CORROSION OF A 12Cr ALLOY IN A CARBONIC ACID 
ENVIRONMENT IN A HIGH-PRESSURE STEAM TURBINE 
J. M. LYONS? and J. CORISHS 
t Electricity Supply Board, Shannonbridge, Co. Offaly, Republic of Ireland 
1 Department of Chemistry, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Republic of Ireland 
Abstract-The kinetics of the corrosion of the turbine blade material 12Cr steel has been studied for periods of up to 
18 x lo3 h on specimens located in an in situ rig attached to a working turbine. Measurements made on the 
distribution of carbon dioxide between the vapour and liquid phases in an in-service turbine had shown that the 
CO2 greatly favours the liquid phase. Specimens were exposed which had been prepared with either electropolished 
or silicon carbide-finished surfaces. Both exhibited parabolic kinetics after an initial lag time had elapsed with the 
measured parabolic rate constant, k,, being 0.49 x lo-’ and 1.05 x 10m5 mg’ crnm4 for the electropolished and SiC- 
finished specimens, respectively. The nature of the corrosion products has been determined using SEM, XRD, 
EPMA, XPS and SIMS with particular attention to the inner oxide layer that formed on the metal substrate. Similar 
specimens were also exposed under the same conditions in a laboratory test rig in which the concentrations of both 
COz and O2 were carefully controlled. Copyright 0 1996 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd 
Ke.vwords: A. acid solutions, A. alloy, A. steel, C. oxidation. 
INTRODUCTION 
There is little variation world-wide in the material used for the manufacture of turbine 
blades for use in power generation facilities. Resistance to oxidation and other types of 
corrosion is a prerequisite together with appropriate mechanical properties. This paper is 
concerned with the resistance of 12Cr stainless steel, a material that is used very extensively 
for such blades, to in-service attack by carbon dioxide. Steam turbines in the electric utility 
industry are designed to operate with approximately 10% moisture content so that their 
thermodynamic operating efficiency is maximized. The moisture content, generally referred 
to as the wetness fraction, is manifested in the last few rows of blades in the low pressure 
(LP) end of the turbine, prior to the steam entering the condenser. As steam expands 
through the turbine it gradually loses its degree of superheat and the solubilities of the 
impurities that it carries decrease. Within the wet steam region, the area most at risk is where 
the first condensate occurs: this is commonly referred to as the Wilson line. This means that 
the LP end of the turbine is exposed to the most corrosive environment and this can result in 
failure of turbine blades due to stress corrosion cracking (SCC). ‘,* 
A primary source of CO2 in turbine steam is from the ingress of organic matter in the 
make-up water to the thermal cycle and its subsequent decomposition by pyrohydrolysis. 
The products of this decomposition have been identified as being principally CO2 and to a 
significantly lesser extent acetic, butyric, formic and propionic acids. Because a two-phase 
system exists in the LP end of the turbine the distribution coefficient of CO2 between the 
Manuscript received 19 October 1995; in amended form 8 January 1996. 
1331 
1332 J. M. Lyons and J. Corish 
vapour and liquid phases under the operating conditions is of paramount importance to the 
corrosion process. A study of this distribution carried out in a working turbine has recently 
been reported, which shows that the CO2 greatly favours the liquid phase and that the 
concentrations attained in that phase can exceed those in the bulk steam by more than an 
order of magnitude.3 While complete condensation of the steam would lead to high 
concentrations of CO* in the liquid phase, the extent to which this process occurs in the LP 
end of the operating turbine will depend on the mass transfer coefficient between vapour and 
liquid phases and consequently the concentration in the liquid phase may not be as high as is 
predicted. Chemical measures are used in an effort to protect the metal surfaces of the 
various turbine components. These involve the use of volatile amines such as hydrazine 
(N*Hd) morpholine (CdHsNO) and cyclohexylamine (ChHtsN), which are weakly basic but 
which differ somewhat in their basicity and in the extent of their hydrolysis. It is obvious that 
their effectiveness in neutralizing wet steam acidified by CO* also depends on their 
distribution between the vapour and liquid phases in the working turbine. Dissolved oxygen 
is always present in the boiler-turbine cycle, but its concentration is generally maintained 
below 5 pg kg- ’ by mechanical deaeration and by the addition of hydrazine. It is regarded 
as the primary cause of corrosion of carbon steel components in the boiler, but its corrosive 
action on 12Cr stainless steel in the presence of CO2 has to date merited little investigation. 
The overall chemical reaction representing the interaction of high-temperature water/ 
steam with iron may be written simply as: 
3Fe + 4H20 P Fe304 + 4H2 (1) 
The mechanism of formation and progress of the reaction is complex, being generally 
diffusion controlled by the transport of iron ions by an outward movement and the inward 
movement of oxygen ions through the oxide layer.4 Oxide nuclei formed in an activated 
process on the surface’ expand in a lateral direction on the surface until they meet with other 
nuclei which form an oxide layer which may be either protective or non-protective. The 
protective layers, which subsequently grow according to a parabolic rate law, can have 
either single or duplex layer morphology. Single layers on these substrates have been found 
to consist of similar columnar grains: the inner layers consist of fine equiaxed grains. In 
general, studies of gas-metal interfaces suggest that single layers grow at the oxide-gas 
interface following metal ion diffusion across the oxide and this diffusion is generally along 
oxide grain boundaries6 The outer layer of the duplex scale also grows at the oxide-metal 
interface, at such a rate that the boundary between the inner and outer layer usually lies at 
the position of the original metal surface.’ Although the volume of the growing oxide, 
whether single or duplex, exceeds that of the original metal substrate, this process may not 
necessarily create any stress because the new oxide grows in an unconstrained space at the 
external surface. 
The rate of oxidation of steels in dry steam follows a parabolic relationship and the 
growth of the oxide layer can generally be represented by the equation: 
(Aw/u)* = 2k,t (1) 
where (Awja) is the weight gain per unit area, k, a parabolic rate constant and t is the time. A 
compact magnetite (Fes04) layer that develops and adheres to the surface ensures that the 
grain structure of the substrate alloy is then protected against corrosive environments 
encountered in well-operated boiler-turbine systems. 
The corrosion of a 12Cr alloy 1333 
When the exposed metal contains added chromium, as is the case for the standard 
turbine blades, then Crz03 is formed together with the normal corrosion product magnetite. 
Increasing the chromium content produces a Cr203 film more resistant to acid 
environments, and this film has been stated to provide satisfactory resistance to wet 
steam.4 High chromium steel is initially attacked at the same rate as is bright mild steel, but it 
rapidly builds up a self-healing passive oxide film which is then protective. Chromium has a 
greater affinity for oxygen than has iron, but the Cr203 layer can only afford protection if it 
remains intact. Wood et a1.8 have described the initially more rapid and finally slower 
oxidation of iron alloys containing only small quantities of chromium in gas-metal 
reactions. There are other studies’.” that explore the nature of the Cr203 layer and the 
mechanism whereby it affords protection when it forms on iron alloys with varying 
chromium content. The resistance of stainless steel to acidic environments in general is 
further improved by the addition of molydenum.” Because of the importance of the 
corrosion of LP blades and SCC in this process, considerable research is also directed at 
designing out mechanical problems and at achieving a complete understanding of the 
chemistry of steam and turbine deposits.2~‘2-‘4 However the study of magnetite growth 
under the conditions existing in a typical turbine has generally been confined to that 
occurring on low alloy steels and plain carbon steel and the effect of adding chromium to the 
substrate metal has not been reported. 
The surface condition of an alloy can play a significant role in its ability to establish a 
resistance to corrosion and the nucleation and growth of an oxide film is very sensitive to the 
condition of the substrate surface.’ 5 The degree of roughness of a surface is related to the 
area in contact with its environment, but even more important is the effect that surface 
treatment can have on sub-surface diffusion rates. The surface condition most closely 
approximating that of a turbine blade is a suitably Sic-finished (cold-worked) surface where 
there is deformation of the surface material to a depth of N 5 pm. Work-free surfaces are 
produced by chemical treatments such as electropolishing or etching or by annealing in 
vucuo: mechanical polishing is used to produce structurally strained surfaces. Surfaces 
produced using these preparative techniques will, in general, carry a prenucleation oxide 
film due to exposure to air which decreases the surface reactivity.16 The effects of surface 
preparation have been elucidated in experimental studies of the gas-metal interface for both 
pure metals and alloys17-‘9 and at high temperatures cold working has been shown to 
promote the selective oxidation of chromium.20-22 It is generally agreed that this selective 
oxidation is due to short circuit diffusion of this element along the grain boundaries leading 
to the fast development of a continuous Cr203 layer. The present work will determine 
whether behaviour similar to that observed at the gas-metal interface occurs in the lower 
temperature steam/water-alloy reactions. 
The growth mechanism of the characteristic duplex magnetite layers formed on mild 
steel in boilers under normal operating conditions has been the subject of a model proposed 
by Potter and Mann23 that involves the outward movement of iron ions and the inward 
counter flow of oxygen ions by solid-state diffusion through the bulk crystal lattice and via 
grain boundaries. Other ~ork~~ by the same authors suggested that another model in which 
the oxidant is supposed to have close access to the metal surface through a network of 
interconnecting pores23 is applicable to the growth of magnetite in high purity water of low 
alkalinity and this model is supported by later studies.25,26 Asakura et a1.27 also presented 
evidence for two layers in their study of the corrosion behaviour of AISI 304 SS in pure 
water at temperatures in the range 473-593K. The growth mechanisms of oxides on a 9Cr 
1334 J. M. Lyons and J. Corish 
steel in a gaseous environment was studied by Iseda et a1.28 and Lees et aI. with the results 
showing a duplex layer, the outer being magnetite and the inner an Fe-Cr spinel. Berge et 
a1.30 have investigated the protective effect of magnetite on bright mild steel in an aqueous 
environment at 500K. There are apparently no reports in the literature of magnetite growth 
mechanisms on 12Cr steel in an alkaline environment: neither has the effect of changing this 
environment to acidic been the subject of research. 
This paper reports on experiments carried out in a specially designed corrosion rig that 
was constructed and installed on a 45 MW turbine which has a high concentration of CO1 
present: the operating pressure was 9.6 MPa and the steam temperature at inlet to the 
turbine was 791K. The rig was connected to a bleed stream where the pressure was 
0.235 MPa (abs) and the temperature 400K, since this was the region of the turbine where 
the first condensate was calculated to form on the 12Cr blades as determined from design 
data supplied by the manufacturers (C. A. Parsons, Newcastle, U.K.). The monitoring 
period extended over 3 years so that a meaningful pattern could be established in the 
corrosion pattern and multiple specimens of 12Cr steel, with both cold-worked and 
electropolished surfaces, were exposed to determine the effects of surface finish on the 
corrosion process. The work makes extensive use of a variety of structural techniques and so 
encompasses an assessment of the influence of the microstructure and thickness of the oxide 
layer on the corrosion. The kinetics were measured using discontinuous gravimetry. The 
corrosion of the 12Cr material has been studied in a working environment containing CO*, 
with emphasis on the mechanisms of protection afforded by magnetite and chromium oxide 
layers against the agressive CO* environment. 
In a second segment of the study, a laboratory system was built to investigate corrosion 
processes on the 12Cr alloy, with varying concentrations of CO* in conjunction with varying 
concentrations of 02 under ideal laboratory conditions. This approach to a proper 
assessment of the problem was considered necessary because air ingress (including COZ) at 
the low pressure end of a turbine can occur for periods of varying length, often depending on 
the frequency of shutdowns. The effect of CO2 on 12Cr steel in the presence of 02 and 
without the protection of a magnetite layer, was studied in these laboratory experiments. 
EXPERIMENTAL METHOD 
Alloy composition and specimen preparation 
The material used for the experiments was a 12% chromium molybdenum stainless steel 
bar in the softened condition and was supplied by the turbine manufacturers, having been 
selected at random. It was analysed prior to use by optical emission spectrometry and was 
found to conform to the standard specifications of the manufacturer: these data are given in 
Table 1. The specimens that were exposed were in the form of discs of dimensions: 
thickness = 6 mm, diameter = 2 mm and square specimens of dimensions 15 x 15 mm and 
6 mm thick. These were initially machined very carefully, to avoid careless abrasion cuts, 
from the as-received bar. Since the influence of surface condition on the corrosion behaviour 
was one of the factors to be investigated, two different surface finishes were applied. The 
mechanically deformed “cold-worked” surface was achieved by grinding with “180 grade” 
silicon carbide paper using an automatic grinding technique. This ensured uniform 
treatment of all the specimens by controlling the variables involved in the process, such as: 
grinding pressure, speed and time, the condition of the SIC paper and the use of water as a 
lubricant. Both flat faces of the specimens were ground for a period of 30 s with constant 
flowing water: this gave a reproducible depth of deformation of the worked layer of _. 
- 5 pm.3’ The work-free surface was achieved by electropolishing in an electrolytic bath of 
15% H$SOd in methanol. A 10-15 V potential was applied between the specimen anode and 
a platinum cathode, the electrolyte was magnetically stirred and the polishing was continued 
for a period of 60min. Following surface preparation as described, the specimens were 
ultrasonically cleaned in ethanol, dried to constant weight and stored in a desiccator. A total 
of 150 specimens, with equal numbers having Sic-finished and electropolished surfaces, 
were prepared in this manner so that all specimens could be destructively tested. The corrosion of a 12Cr alloy 1335 
Table 1. Chemical specification of the 12 Cr alloy as given by 
the manufacturer and as measured in the laboratory 
Chemical composition (wt%) 
Component As measured Specification 
Min Max 
C 0.136 
Si 0.260 
Mn 0.565 
P 0.007 
S 0.010 
Cr 11.760 
Ni 0.400 
MO 0.476 
cu 0.066 
Al 0.007 
Ti 0.003 
Nb <O.OOl 
V 0.011 
W <O.OOl 
Cd 0.016 
Sn 0.007 
B 0.003 
N 0.060 0.09 0.15 
0.50 
0.70 
0.04 
0.03 
11.50 13.00 
0.60 
0.40 0.80 
Not specified in 
supply contract 
document 
In situ measurements 
The in situ exposures were made in a test chamber designed to receive a sample of steam 
from the bleed pipe supplying steam from the LP section of the turbine to the deaerator on a 
45 MW single cylinder turbine. The test rig, shown in Fig. 1, was constructed of AISI 3 16 SS 
material.32 Argon arc welding was used throughout and the joints were ground, polished 
and microscopically examined to ensure the elimination of all potential sources of corrosive 
contaminants. The lid of the chamber was fitted with runners on to which the racks carrying 
the specimens were attached. Each rack had a capacity for nine specimens and a total of 72 
test specimens, both Sic-finished and electropolished were placed in the test rig to facilitate 
destructive testing techniques. They were insulated from metal to metal contact with the 
racks by means of Teflon (PTFE) liners, the use of which was found to be satisfactory at 
550K in earlier analogous studies.33,34 
The outlet from the test chamber was connected to the condenser flashbox, which was at 
negative pressure, through a non-return valve and with a sample line inserted into the outlet 
1336 J. M. Lyons and J. Corish 
(4 (b) 
1: Inlet Steam 7: Non-return Valve 
2: Isolation Valves 8: Sample Cooler 
3: Reaction Chamber 9: Cooling Water In 
4: Baffle 10: Cooling Water Out 
5: Temperature Probe 11: Condensed Steam Out 
6: Pressure Probe 12: To Condenser Flash Box 
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the in situ rig that was attached to the turbine: (a) reaction 
chamber and connections; (b) specimen holding rack (not to scale) in which the specimens were 
insulated from the stainless steel rack using teflon liners; the rack was suspended from the lid of the 
reaction chamber. 
pipe which provided samples with a stainless steel cooler. These samples were routed to a 
cation conductivity (CC) monitor (Model 4510 Kent Conductivity Monitor with automatic 
temperature compensation) and an 02 monitor (Model 27 13 Orbisphere Dissolved Oxygen 
Monitor), which provided continuous readouts and recording of data. The dissolved oxygen 
concentration was verified each week by the calorimetric (CHEMetrics ampoules) 
method.35 In addition, grab samples of superheated steam condensate together with 
samples from the test rig were, where feasible, were taken each week and analysed for: total 
iron, COZ, SOd2-, Cl-, Na+, acetic, butyric, formic and propionic acid contents. The 
measurements of the concentrations of the carbonic acid and organic acids were carried out 
using ion chromatography. The concentrations of carbonic acid determined in this manner 
were compared with those predicted by the CC method. The close agreement found between 
the measured and predicted values, i.e. within f 5%, indicated that only very small 
concentrations of other ions were present in the steam. This was confirmed by the Cl- and 
so4 2- ion measurements which were < 2 pg kg-‘. The CC of the superheated steam 
The corrosion of a 12Cr alloy 1337 
entering the turbine was also monitored continuously and recorded and compared with the 
data from the test rig instrument. The temperature and pressure in the reaction chamber 
were measured through special tapping points using sensors. The entire assembly was lagged 
with aluminium-clad glasswool and the measurements showed that pressure and 
temperature losses were negligible. 
The test specimens were exposed for periods of not less than 18 x lo3 h operating time 
with analyses being performed at intervals of 3 x lo3 h. Gravimetric kinetic measurements 
and structural analysis data were obtained after all six time intervals. Weight gains were 
measured to within 50 pg using a OHAUS 110 microbalance. During the time over which 
the experiments were done the turbine was off load for two periods of 1700 h each for 
routine maintenance. Further downtime periods of short duration amounted in all to 1850 h 
so that the experiments spanned a total period of 23.25 x lo3 h. During turbine outages 
dehumidified air was pumped through the turbine and also the rest rig so that the specimens 
were at all times in the same environment as were the turbine blades. 
The laboratory test rig 
The laboratory test rig, shown in Fig. 2, was designed to carry out in the laboratory 
experiments analogous to those carried out in the in situ exposures. These experiments 
enabled the effect of varying the concentration of CO* in association with varying the 02 
1: Site for conductivity 7: Mixing coil 
measurements 8: 02 Inlet 
2: Site for 02 9: Condensed steam 
measurements inlet 
3: Sample cooler 10: HzCOs solution 
4: Reaction vessel 11: Peristaltic pump 
5: Specimen holder 12: Sample from reaction 
6: Heater vessel 
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the test rig used for the laboratory experiments. 
1338 J. M. Lyons and J. Corish 
concentration under carefully controlled conditions to be investigated and also provided 
independent control data for evaluation purposes. Since O2 can be a primary source of 
corrosion in the form of pitting of the metal surface, especially when small amounts of 
chloride and sulphate ions are present, great care was taken to ensure that the 
concentrations of these two anions were maintained at < 2 pg kg- ’ during the 
experiments. The feedwater supply to this test rig was deoxygenated and deionized 
condensed steam with a conductivity ~0.1 pg cm-’ at 298K and the chosen 
concentrations of CO2 and O2 were added to this. The dissolved oxygen concentration in 
the reaction chamber was established by accurately controlling the flow of oxygen-saturated 
feedwater by means of a peristaltic pump: the CO2 concentration was controlled in the same 
manner. These added solutions were ultimately mixed with the feedwater flow prior to 
entering the reaction chamber by means of a mixing coil. The racks containing a total of 72 
insulated test specimens were attached to the lid of the reaction chamber and the solution 
was continuously stirred. The temperature was maintained at 340K with a pressure of 
0.1 MPa (abs) for the duration of the experiments. These values were chosen because they 
cover the range of values of these parameters for the three relevant bleeds of the 45 MW 
turbine at full and 50% load. Two series of experiments were performed in this model 
system. In the first, Regime A, the 02 concentration was maintained in the range 8- 
lOpgkg-’ with a CO* concentration 1000 pg kg- ’ k 5%. In the second, Regime B, the 
O2 concentration was held at 200 pg kg-’ f 5% with the COZ concentration as it was in 
the first series. The higher concentration of oxygen was used because observations made 
during the early states of the in situ study showed that oxygen concentrations of this 
magnitude could be maintained for periods of - 1000 h after a turbine cover lift and for 
periods of 24-48 h due to infrequent minor air in-leakages. The test specimens used in the 
model rig were prepared as for the in situ experiments and were exposed to each of the test 
environments for a total period of 3 x lo3 h: they were removed for analysis at intervals of 
500 h. The oxygen and CO1 concentrations were determined using the same methods as were 
used in the analyses of the turbine bleed steam. 
Analyses of corrosion products 
The exposed specimens from both the in situ and model systems were characterized as 
fully as was possible using a range of complementary structural analytical techniques to 
investigate the morphology, distribution and composition of the phases formed under each 
exposure condition. The techniques used were diffraction (XRD), scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM), electron-probe microanalysis (EPMA), X-ray photo-electron 
spectroscopy (XPS) and secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). 
X-Ray diffraction measurements were made using a Siemens Type D-500 diffractometer 
with Cu-Ku radiation and were used for in situ non-destructive analysis of the phases that 
developed on the alloy surfaces after exposure. The analysis of the diffraction patterns was 
computer assisted. To assess possible Cr substitution in the magnetite the position of a high 
angle peak was measured very accurately by adding silicon powder to act as an internal 
standard. 
SEM measurements were made with either a Cambridge S360 or a Hitachi S520 
instrument and were used to examine cross-sections of the exposed specimens as well as their 
surfaces. Prior to cross-sectioning the specimens were degreased and the surface to be 
examined was sputter-coated with gold and electroplated with nickel to keep the surface 
phases intact during polishing. Following mounting in conductive carbon-filled bakelite the 
The corrosion of a 12Cr alloy 1339 
specimens were sectioned in the centre perpendicular to the major face and the exposed 
section polished by grinding on successively fine emery paper. Finally the surface was 
prepared using y-alumina powder of particle size 0.5 pm slurried in water. 
The morphology and distribution of the phases formed on the alloy surfaces were also 
investigated using EPMA with spectrometers attached to both SEM instruments each with 
energy dispersive Si(Li) detectors and tungsten hairpin filament emitters. The X-ray spectral 
information provided elemental point analyses of selected areas and features on the surface 
via standard analytical software. 
XPS analyses were carried out on a Kratos XSAM 800 instrument fitted with a Kratos 
Minibeam I argon ion sputtering source operating at 3 kV and 4 PA to effect depth profiling. 
Spectra were recorded with monochromated Al-Ku X-rays (hv = 1486.6 eV) at an anode 
power of 240 W. Electron take-off was at 90” to the sample surface giving a typical depth of 
analysis of 3&50 A. The instrument was microprocessor controlled with the binding energy 
(B.E.) calibration based on measurement of the Au4f7,z line at 84.0eV which, under the 
operating conditions, has a resolution of - 1.2 eV. A low energy electron flood compensated 
for any build-up of charge on sample surfaces and peaks were, in addition, charge corrected 
by setting the Cls line for adventitious hydrocarbon at 285 eV. 
SIMS spectra and their attendant depth profiles were measured on a VSW DPS 10 
duoplasmatron system operating with oxygen gas (02+) at 5 kV and 75 nA. A raster-gated 
mass-selected analysis from a 10% area centred in a 200-300pm region on the sample 
surface swept out by a 20pm spot was then recorded. A Balzers QHS511, &500 amu 
quadrupole mass spectrometer with a VSW energy filter attachment was used to identify 
and quantify the secondary ions. A single channeltron electron multiplier located 90” off- 
axis to ensure high-sensitivity ion detection was used in the counting system. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
Corrosion kinetics 
The kinetic data were derived from weight measurements of triplicate samples and are 
shown in Fig. 3. The corrosion of specimens prepared with both surface finishes was found 
to follow parabolic kinetics as expressed in equation (2). A plot of the weight gain per 
surface area, Awla, against elapsed time gave values for the parabolic rate constants of: 
k, = 0.50 x 10 -5 mg* cmp4 h- ’ and k, = 1.03 x 10e5 mg-* cme4 h-’ for the electropolished 
and Sic-finished surfaces, respectively. As subsequent detailed comparisons of the 
corrosion behaviour of the alloy with regard to surface finishes will reveal, the principal 
difference is this factor of approximately 100% in their weight gains after the 18 x lo3 h 
period of exposure. The parabolic growth rate observed for both surface finishes indicates 
that the reaction is controlled by diffusion through compact growing layers.4 As is evident 
the initial stages of the exposure, especially for the Sic-finished surface do not conform to 
parabolic kinetics: these differences in start-up kinetics observed between samples with 
different surface finishes will be discussed in detail later. 
Structural studies of the corrosion products 
Scanning electron microscope. The corrosion products on the Sic-finished specimens in 
the in situ experiments consisted of two distinct layers: an inner smooth layer of fine-grained 
oxide and an outer layer of loosely adherent octahedral- and tetrahedral-shaped crystals of 
varying dimensions. SEM images of the surfaces were used to monitor changes in surface 
1340 J. M. Lyons and J. Corish 
I.0 
0.8 - 
p! 
E 
” 0.6 - 
E 
.e 
E 0.4 
.z 
IO.21 ,;/%/= 
.;’ 
.“,’ , Ic I I I I 
0 3 6 9 12 I5 
Time (h) x IO3 
Fig. 3. Kinetic data measured for the silicon carbide-finished (-x- Sic) and electropolished 
(-o- EP) specimens of the 12Cr alloy in the in situ test rig. 
phase morphology, in the degree of coverage and other surface features. Although the 
images taken at different exposure times did not refer to the same surface, because the test 
specimens were not returned to the test rig after analysis, a consistent pattern of behaviour 
was observed. The surfaces were examined after exposure periods of 3, 6, 9, 12, 15 and 
18 x lo3 h. Cross-sectional metallography was also used to derive information about the 
growth process of the underlying oxide layers. After SEM imaging of their surfaces the 
specimens were sectioned, as described previously, and the thicknesses of the underlying 
oxide layers were measured. To obtain a statistically representative value for these 
thicknesses, the average of 28 measurements was taken for each of the cross-sections. 
These measurements revealed the layers to be very uniform with little variation from place 
to place over the entire exposed surface: the measured thicknesses are given in Table 2. 
SEM images of the surfaces of Sic-finished specimens exposed for periods of 3 x 1 O3 and 
12 x lo3 h are shown in Figs 4(a) and (b), respectively. These are representative of the full 
sequence of images which showed that the sizes of the crystals present on these oxide 
surfaces varied from less than 1 pm up to 12 pm with no apparent correlation between the 
size of the crystals and the length of exposure of the particular specimen, after the first 
exposure period. The shapes of the crystals tended to be flat and irregular for the period of 
3 x lo3 h, but after subsequent periods of exposure, many well-developed octahedral-shaped 
crystals were evident. There was clear evidence that the microcrystals tended to align along 
the surface grooves produced by the grinding technique, which would indicate that these 
scratches were acting as preferred nucleation or deposition sites. Crystals which at first 
appeared to be globular were revealed by closer inspection to consist of agglomerates of 
many smaller crystals. After 6 x lo3 h the crystals had more regular shapes and the 
The corrosion of a 12Cr alloy 1341 
Table 2. The thickness measurements (each is the 
average of 28 readings) of the inner oxide layers formed 
on the 12 Cr alloy on silicon carbide (Sic) finished and 
electropolished (EP) surfaces 
Exposure time 
(h x 103) 
3 
6 
9 
12 
15 
18 Surface condition 
Sic EP 
412nm 269 nm 
632 nm 471 nm 
685 nm 592 nm 
1170nm 681 nm 
980 nm 706 nm 
1080 nm 696 nm 
population density of the larger crystals was seen to continue to increase slightly: after 
9 x lo3 h exposure their shapes tended to deteriorate. This observation was not fully 
understood and, while not evident after exposures of 12 x lo3 and 15 x IO3 h, it was again 
apparent after 18 x 1 O3 h. 
SEM images of the cross-sections of the inner oxide layers developed on the Sic-finished 
surfaces also after periods of 3 x lo3 and 12 x lo3 h are shown in Figs 5(a) and (b), 
respectively. As is apparent the compact fine-grained layer after 3 x lo3 h was uniform in 
appearance with no evidence of crystal or nodular growth, an average thickness of 412 nm 
and with crystals sitting on the surface. The layer increased in thickness during the exposure 
times of 6, 9 and 12 x lo3 h, but thereafter showed no increase in thickness. The small 
decrease in this measurement for the exposure periods of 15 x lo3 and 18 x lo3 h is not 
regarded as significant (Table 2). Essentially the thickness of the inner layer was of similar 
magnitude for the exposure periods of 12, 15 and 18 x lo3 h and there was no increase 
apparent in the population density of the surface crystals. 
An analogous sequence of SEM images taken of the electropolished specimens again 
revealed consistent behaviour, but with a pattern somewhat different from&hat observed on 
the Sic-finished material. After an exposure of 3 x lo3 h there was now only a minimal 
number of well-developed crystals in evidence and the outer layer consisted of a lateral 
spread of globular crystals in agglomerate form. Some minute scratches present, which were 
considerably less deep than the grooves on the Sic-finished surfaces, did not give rise to any 
significant preferential growth. SEM micrographs of typical surfaces taken after 3 x lo3 and 
12 x lo3 h exposures are shown in Figs 6(a) and (b), respectively: the corresponding SEM 
images of the cross sections of the inner oxide layers are shown in Figs 7(a) and (b). While 
the oxide layer was present after 3 x lo3 h, it was not uniform and appeared to be extending 
irregularly into the alloy substrate. Both a well-developed inner oxide layer and a 
population of well-formed octahedral crystals were evident after a 6 x lo3 h exposure 
together with some globular crystals. The inner layer, now of average thickness of 471 nm, 
again showed an irregular pattern at the alloy substrate boundary. After 9 x lo3 h the 
population density of well-defined crystals in the outer layer again increased and these were 
randomly distributed. For exposure periods of 12, 15 and 18 x lo3 h there was no further 
increase in either the population density or the size of the crystals. There was a modest 
increase in the inner layer thickness, 592 nm at 9 x lo3 h to 681 nm at 12 x lo3 h, but for the 
1342 J. M. Lyons and J. Corish 
Fig. 4. SEM micrographs of the corrosion products on Sic-finished surfaces: (a) after 3 x IO3 hand 
(b) after 12 x lo3 h, each shown at two magnifications: the scales on the micrographs are in pm. 
W The corrosion of a 12Cr alloy 
Fig. 5. SEM micrographs of cross-sections of the corrosion products on Sic-finished specimens 
after (a) 3 x IO3 h exposure and (b) 12 x lo3 h exposure, each shown at two magnifications: the scales 
on the micrographs are in pm. 
J. M. Lyons and J. Corish 
Fig. 6. SEM micrographs of the corrosion products electropolished surfaces, (a) after 3 x lo3 h 
exposure and (b) after 12 x lo3 h-exposure, each shown at two magnifications: the scales on the 
micrographs are in pm. 
The corrosion of a 12Cr alloy 1345 
09 
Fig. 7. SEM micrographs of cross-sections of the corrosion products on electropolished specimens 
after (a) 3 x IO3 h exposure and (b) 12 x lo3 h exposure, each shown at two magnifications: the scales 
on the micrographs are in pm. 
1346 J. M. Lyons and J. Corish 
subsequent periods of exposure the thickness did not show any further significant increase: 
after 18 x IO3 h it stood at an average of 696 nm (Table 2). 
X-ray dzfiaction. The phase formed on the alloy surface was identified by reference to 
the powder diffraction file (PDF) system. Despite extensive searches for other likely 
candidates the only phase detected was magnetite (Fe304). The magnetite peaks were clearly 
evident on a specimen exposed for 15 x IO3 h with the strongest peak being due to iron. Thin 
film geometry was used with the maximum signal being obtained with a fixed 0 angle of 4” 
and scanning in 28. The substitution of Cr for Fe causes only a very small change in lattice 
parameters36 so that the XRD patterns of Fe-Cr and FeCrzOd (chromite) are almost 
identical to those of Fe and Fe304 (magnetite). Attempts to measure Cr substitution in the 
magnetite using a thin layer of silicon as an internal standard and a very slow scan of the 
relevant region were unsuccessful: the CrzOs phase was also undetected. The XRD 
measurements indicated that the oxide layer was virtually pure magnetite, but it is 
probable that the crystals on the oxide surface, because of their size, would have masked 
any signal from the underlying layer at low 9 during a glancing incidence scan. Hence no 
reliable information was derived from XRD on the composition of the inner oxide layer. 
Electron probe microanalysis. The two layers identified by the SEM examinations of the 
corrosion products were analysed separately using EPMA. Five large crystals of the outer 
porous layer whose size would minimize penetration of the electron beam into the 
underlying oxide layer and alloy substrate were selected for analysis on each test 
specimen: the averages of these five measurements were taken. The chemical composition 
of the crystals on both electropolished and Sic-finished surfaces confirmed the XRD 
findings that Fe304 was the only phase present in the crystals. Surface preparation did not 
have any apparent effect and the quantity of Cr detected at less than 2.0 wt% was very low. 
A slightly higher Cr content at 2.1 wt% measured after 3 x lo3 h exposure of the 
electropolished surface was probably a result of a contribution from the substrate metal 
due to the absence of crystals and the very thin oxide layer. The EPMA results for the 
underlying fine-grained oxide layer are summarized in Table 3. While there is some random 
variation in the amounts of Fe, Cr and 0 found to be present after the various exposure 
times this is not regarded as significant and is probably due to the relative thicknesses of the 
inner layer that was being analysed. The most important result is the consistent increase in 
the Cr content with exposure time. 
XPS analysis and depth profiling. An independent depth calibration-time depth 
relationship was established for the XPS measurements using the argon ion sputter source 
on test specimens with both Sic-finished and electropolished surfaces prior to their 
exposure. A wide energy (1100-O eV) scan was used to establish which elements were present 
and the following spectral regions Fe2p (735-700 eV), Cr2p (595-565 eV), 01s (543-523 eV) 
and Cls (297-277 eV) were subsequently scanned with improved resolution both before and 
after each period of etching. Expanded BE scale plots for these main photo-electron lines 
were used to calculate the elemental concentrations (%) of these species for each surface 
examined and the results showed clearly that the surface of each sample examined was 
heavily contaminated with a carbonaceous material that gave large contributions from the 
Cls spectral line.37 Depth profiles recorded for specimens prior to acid steam exposure for a 
total time of 12 min showed a sharp decrease in this Cls contribution which subsequently 
increased a little before levelling off and the 01s mirrored this behaviour almost exactly. The 
The corrosion of a 12Cr alloy 1347 
Table 3. Electron probe microanalysts of the inner oxide layers formed on (a) Sic-finished and 
(b) electropolished surfaces of the 12 Cr alloy after the stated exposure times 
Chemical composition (wt%) 
Time (h x 103) Fe Cr Ni Si MO Mn 0 
(a) SC-finished 
3 67.6 13.1 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.6 11.6 
6 59.3 13.6 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 25.8 
9 65.7 13.9 0.5 0.6 0.5 18.4 
12 59.8 15.3 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 23.5 
15 54.6 16.9 0.5 0.3 0.5 0.4 26.2 
18 51.2 17.2 0.5 0.3 0.4 0.4 24.0 
(b) Electropolished 
3 69.1 12.3 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.5 17.1 
6 66.9 13.4 0.4 0.3 0.6 0.5 18.2 
9 65.1 13.9 0.5 0.4 0.6 0.5 18.4 
12 63.0 14.3 0.6 0.4 0.6 0.6 20.5 
15 64.5 14.2 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.5 19.4 
18 60.7 15.3 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 22.5 
initial binding energy positions of the Fe2p and Cr2p peaks indicate that these elements were 
present as FC304 and/or Fez03 (-710.9 eV) and Cr203 (-576.6 eV), respectively. The 
spectral envelopes changed with etching as shown in Fig. 8 with the Fe binding energy going 
to - 706.4 eV and that of Cr2p to - 574.3 eV, indicating the presence of the metallic state for 
both elements in the sub-surface region. No additional changes over those illustrated for the 
8 min etch in Fig. 8 occurred during a prolonged test etch period of 58 min. 
XPS measurements on samples with both surface finishes which had been exposed in the 
rig showed no significant differences between the corrosion products which formed on the 
two surface finishes. Very much longer sputter etching times were required to achieve a near- 
equilibrium composition and the data shown in Fig. 9, which refer to a Sic-finished 
specimen exposed for 18 x lo3 h, illustrate how the per cent atomic concentrations of the 
principal species vary over a 960 min time interval. There was little or no variation in the 
shape of the Fe2p spectral envelope until -600 min, after which it broadened and a 
pronounced shoulder developed on the low binding energy side. This additional feature at 
-706.3 eV was attributed to metallic iron. Analogous behaviour by the Cr2p envelope 
produced a shoulder at - 574.3 eV after 960 min of sputter which corresponded to metallic 
chromium. The rapid decrease in intensity of the Cls line indicated that the original surface 
was heavily contaminated with carbonaceous species. The persistence of the 01s layer until 
- 500 min provided evidence for the oxide layer. 
SIMS analysis and depth profding. A procedure analogous to that adopted for the XPS 
analysis, in which an independent depth calibration-time depth relationship was 
determined on Sic-finished and electropolished specimens before they were exposed to the 
corrosive environment, was followed for the SIMS measurements. The 02+ ion was used 
and the following six masses were recorded: 23(Na+), 52(Cr+), 62(Fe+), 68(CrO+), 
72(FeO+) and 12(C+). Depth profiles, all as a function of etch time, were constructed 
1348 J. M. Lyons and J. Corish 
Binding energy 
(b) 
(iv) 
(iii) 
(ii) 
(i) 
Binding energy 
Fig. 8. XPS measurements from an Sic-finished specimen before exposure. The spectral envelopes 
for (a) Fe2p and (b) Cr2p were determined (i) as prepared, (ii) after sputter etching for I min, (iii) after 
3 min and (iv) after 8 min total etch time. 
showing: (i) the intensities of the six masses, suitably scaled; (ii) the ratios Cr+:Fe+ and 
CrO’:FeO+; and (iii) the ratios Fe +:FeO+ and Cr+:CrO+. The full details of the 
techniques used will be published elsewhere.38 
The Sic-finished reference sample was considerably more contaminated than was the 
electropolished surface, presumably because of the preparation process. Significant organic 
fragments were removed after only a very brief etch time, Na+ and K+ peaks attributable to 
normal handling contamination were more persistent and the samples were shown to have 
thin metal oxide layers. The electropolished reference sample showed very little organic 
contamination but had strong Na+ and Kt peaks as well as peaks corresponding to Fe+ 
and Cr+, cf. Fig. 10(a). After etching for 1Omin at lOOnA all the Na+ and K+ had 
disappeared and oxide peaks of both Cr and Fe were visible. Because of the extensive work 
involved in the full SIMS analyses that were carried out, only those test specimens that had 
undergone in situ exposure for periods of 3 x lo3 and 18 x lo3 h were examined in this way. 
Sic-finished specimens exposed for each of these time intervals showed contamination 
with organic material. The depth profile for the 3 x lo3 h specimen showed no CrC peak at 
The corrosion of a 12Cr alloy 1349 
-e- Cls 
* 01s 
- Fe2p 
* Cr2p 
0 
0 200 400 600 600 1000 
Etch time ( min. ) 
Fig. 9. Changes in the per cent atomic concentrations for the relevant elements with etch time 
measured on a Sic-finished specimen that had been exposed in the in situ rig for a total of 18 x 1 O3 h. 
the surface, but it then quickly became evident, peaked after a 100 min etch at 2.5 nA and 
thereafter decreased to a steady value after a further 140 min of etching. There was also a 
gradual increase in the metallic nature of both the Fe+ and Crf present. There were some 
experimental difficulties with the Sic-finished specimen exposed for 18 x lo3 h, possibly 
because of charge build-up as a result of the retention of small particles of the insulating SIC 
in the corrosion layer. The Fe+ and FeOf peaks were the main signals both initially and 
after additional sputtering. 
Figure 10 is a comparison of the depth profiles obtained for a reference electropolished 
specimen and for a similarly prepared sample that had been exposed for 3 x lo3 h. An 
examination of the various ion yields for the latter (Fig. 10(b)) shows that it had an increased 
Fe+ signal compared to that of Cr + , which decreased linearly to a steady value after 
- 220 min etching. There were also differences between the Cr:Fe ratios measured for the 
electropolished and those for the Sic-finished specimens. The electropolished specimen 
exposed for 18 x 1 O3 h was quite different and showed a depletion of Cr + in the surface layer 
which was similar to that in the Sic-finished specimen that had been exposed for the same 
time interval. This depletion lasted through - 90 min etch time before the level of Cr + 
slowly increased to a maximum, though not quite levelling out. 
Samples with both surface finishes when exposed for 18 x lo3 h were seen to have 
mottled surfaces comprising dark and light areas. Mass spectra were obtained on and off the 
darker areas on the electropolished specimen and the dark areas were found to contain 
much more Cr+ than did the corresponding lighter areas. This may explain the differences 
noted above in the depth profiles of the specimens that had been exposed for 18 x lo3 h 
because the depth profiling process samples a region of the surface that may not be spatially 
homogeneous. 
1350 J. M. Lyons and J. Corish 
0 
0 110 220 330 440 550 660 770 880 F 
Etch time ( min ) 
@I 20000 + 23 Na * 5 
* 52 Cr L 1 
+ 56 Fe f 1 
- 68 CrO * 25 
- 72 Fe0 t 25 
d 12c *loo 
+ 23 No * 5 
* 52 Cr * 1 
+ 56 Fe * 1 
- 68 00 * 25 
+ 72 Fe0 * 25 
- 12c *lOO 
Etch time ( min ) 
Fig. 10. Positive ion depth profiles measured by SIMS for electropolished specimens: (a) the 
reference surface before exposure; and (b) after 3 x lo3 h exposure in the in situ rig. The intensity 
counts of the various species have been scaled as indicated in the diagram. 
Results from the laboratory rig 
In assuming the role of CO* in the corrosion of a 12 Cr alloy in a working turbine, with 
all the variable conditions that are unavoidable in such an in situ experiment, it was 
considered appropriate and necessary to provide the independent control experiment under 
the model conditions described previously for the laboratory rig. The products were 
characterized using the same techniques as were used for the samples exposed in situ and 
routine monitoring of both the make-up water and the experimental environment of the test 
rig was carried out with corrective action being taken where necessary during the course of 
the experiments to ensure that the control environments as described were maintained. 
The corrosion of a 12Cr alloy 1351 
Kinetic data were derived from weight measurements of triplicate samples removed after 
each 500 h during the total 3000 h exposure. These observations showed both weight gains 
and weight losses compared to the base measurements prior to exposure for Sic-finished 
specimens after 2 x lo3 h and for electropolished specimens after 3 x 1 O3 h. The Sic-finished 
specimens exposed for 3 x lo3 h did show a consistent positive weight gain, but the overall 
quality of the data measured in the rig made it impossible to reliably determine a weight gain 
relationship within the time scale of the experiments. 
SEM images of the surfaces of both Sic-finished and electropolished specimens exposed 
in the model rig also proved to be of limited value. Even after 3 x lo3 h there was little 
apparent change from the reference specimens, although there was an indication of oxide 
formation in grooves of the Sic-finished specimens after 3 x lo3 h exposure. EPMA analysis 
to confirm this observation was inconclusive. Cross-sectional metallography did, however, 
provide strong evidence that an oxide layer was forming on the metal surface. Exposures of 
both surface finishes to either of the two experimental regimes for 1000 h did not provide 
any evidence for oxide formation. After 2000 h there were patches of oxide to be seen at 
random on the surfaces and after the total exposure period of 3 x lo3 h the specimens under 
both experimental regimes exhibited definite oxide layer presence. There were no apparent 
differences between the appearances and thicknesses of the oxide layers on specimens with 
the same surface finish after exposure under either of the experimental regimes used. 
However, the Sic-finished surfaces had a thicker and more uniform oxide layer than had the 
electropolished specimens. After 3 x lo3 h this layer appeared to be fine-grained, compact 
and adherent to the metal surface and to have an average thickness of 187 nm which is 
consistent with the kinetic data from the in situ experiments for this period of exposure. The 
corresponding layer on the electropolished surface appeared to be incomplete and not fully 
protective of the alloy. EPMA analyses were unreliable due to the thin nature of the oxide 
layer which led to an interference contribution from the substrate metal. 
Detailed XPS measurements, including depth profiling as described previously, were 
found to be worthwhile only for those samples that had been exposed for the full duration of 
3 x lo3 h in the more aggressive environment (Regime B). The~binding energy positions of 
the Fe2p and Cr2p peaks from the exposed specimens, at 710.9 eV and 576.6eV, 
respectively, indicate that those elements are present at Fe304 and/or Fez03 and Cr203. 
All the exposed samples were heavily contaminated by a carbonaceous material which 
showed large contributions from the Cls line. The Sic-finished specimens were more 
severely affected and also exhibited a relatively large Si2p signal which fell away only slightly 
with depth. The Fe2p and Cr2p contributions were quite small and rose only a little during 
etching, the Fe2p intensity more so than the Cr2p signal. Distinctive changes in the 
oxidation states of these peaks were also observed, but the overall change to Fe(O) and 
Cr(0) was on a much longer time scale compared with that for the reference material: the 
metallic states were dominant only after a total etch time of 32 min. The depth profiles from 
the exposed electropolished specimens were somewhat similar with rather small Fe2p and 
Cr2p contributions which increased slowly, but remained relatively less intense than were 
the corresponding peaks in the reference material. Again an extended profile of some 18 min 
was required to begin to see the metallic surface and even then there remained a major 
contribution from oxide species of both elements. 
1352 J. M. Lyons and J. Corish 
DISCUSSION 
Experimental regimes 
The turbine chosen for the in situ experiments described here did not have a condensate 
polishing demineralizing plant and the steam supply to the rig was taken from the region in 
which the first condensate formed. These factors, together with our knowledge of the 
distribution ratio, 6, of CO2 between the gaseous and liquid phases3 made the conditions 
especially suitable to determine the effect of CO2 on the corrosion of “in service” turbine 
material. Even though the concentrations of the various contaminants in the steam/water 
cycle of such a boiler turbine system are maintained at very low levels by rigorous chemical 
control, the laboratory test rig exposures were carried out to provide independent control 
experiments. The conditions chosen in this model system sought to reproduce the pressures 
and temperatures of the three bleeds in the LP end of the turbine for full load and 50% load 
conditions. The level of CO* added to the ultrapure carrier water in the laboratory rig was 
chosen to be close to the maximum value measured in the turbine, the lower level of O2 
corresponded to the normal level of 02 measured in the turbine and the higher 02 level to 
levels found in the turbine for periods (< 500 h each) on coming back on load after outages 
for maintenance. The laboratory measurements were therefore designed so that the data 
measured could be compared with the results from the in situ test rig mounted on the 
working turbine. 
Oxide layer nucleation and structure 
The results from the in situ exposures fulfil the principal objective of the study and show 
that under operating conditions with high concentrations of CO* in the bulk steam, a 
protective coating of oxide is formed on the 12 Cr turbine alloy material. The product had a 
two-layer structure of which the outer layer, which was very porous, consisted of magnetite 
crystals generally octahedral in shape which appeared to have been nucleated and grown 
from solution elsewhere in the turbine and deposited as preformed particles. This proposed 
method of production of the crystals is supported by a number of observations. Firstly, the 
complete absence of crystallites in the analogous experiments in the laboratory test rig 
indicates that they do not grow from the substrate alloy. Secondly, only very small amounts 
of chromium (< 2% after all exposure periods) were found to be present in the crystals that 
were formed in the in situ exposures and this contrasts with the much larger percentages (15- 
17%, Table 3) found in the inner oxide layers. It had been well established in the turbine 
used here that the turbine casing at the LP end had suffered significant corrosion which 
resulted in solutions containing iron. Earlier work on an experimental turbine’35’4,39 had 
shown that a liquid film can form on turbine blades in the wet zone of the LP end which 
would make possible the deposition of crystals containing Fe from elsewhere in the turbine. 
If the crystals seen in the present study had grown from the substrate alloy the process would 
have involved an excess of metal ions being transported through the inner oxide layer to the 
surface, followed by dissolution in the aqueous film with subsequent deposition.23 If this 
occurred, a reasonable expectation would be that the chromium content would be similar to 
that found in the inner oxide layer. Finally an examination of the morphology of the crystals 
formed on both surface finishes showed that they were broadly similar throughout the total 
exposure period: this again supports the hypothesis that the crystals were nucleated 
elsewhere in the system. The noted exceptional absence of crystals from the electropolished 
surface after 3 x lo3 h exposure was probably due the the fact that the highly polished 
The corrosion of a 12Cr alloy 1353 
surface did not provide sites on which the crystals could be attached. The presence of 
crystallites on the surface is also considered to be responsible for the fact that the SIMS data 
show that there were areas of higher chromium concentration distributed at random over 
the exposed surfaces. Because of the nature of the technique, in which the ion beam sampled 
an area some of which was covered by magnetite crystals (~2% Cr), the data showed 
certain areas with a high Fe signal. Other possible explanations such as the selective leaching 
of either iron or chromium from the surface are unlikely, given the experimental conditions 
prevailing in the environment of the in situ test rig.27,4o 
All of the exposures investigated here, including those in the laboratory test rig, cause a 
fine-grained compact and adherent layer to be developed on the surfaces of the test 
specimens. This is in broad agreement with the findings of Ramasubramanian et al.4’ and 
Shoesmith et af.34 working on AISI 304, the former at a pH of 8-9 and room temperature 
and the latter at a pH of 3 and a temperature in the range 350-360K. In this study in the in 
situ rig the temperature range was 330-4OOK and with the concentration of CO2 that was 
found to be present, the pH value was expected to be in the range 5.5-6.0.42 The exact value 
would depend on the extent to which the CO2 favours the liquid phase and that there was 
sufficient time for the mass transfer of all the CO2 to the liquid phase to take place. 
Inner oxide layer growth mechanism and kinetics 
The action of high temperature water/steam on iron, as expressed in equation (1) 
produces magnetite:4 when alloyed steel is exposed to the same environment, magnetite is 
again produced together with oxides of the alloying elements. Chromium is an important 
element in alloying because it forms Cr203, which is resistant to acidic environments. Cross- 
sectional metallography of the inner oxide layer formed in the in situ test rig showed it to be 
compact and that it adhered closely to the substrate alloy. The measured thicknesses of the 
layer were found to increase in a manner analogous to the kinetic data, which followed a 
parabolic rate law for surfaces with both surface finishes. This requires that the oxide 
growth is governed by the outward transport of metal ions from the underlying metal 
substrate and the inward transport of oxygen, as described by Potter and Mann23 and 
Effertz,43 for magnetite growth in their work on ferritic steels. These transport processes 
take place by solid-state diffusion through the bulk crystal lattices and via grain boundaries 
with oxide growth occurring at the oxide-metal interface. The EPMA analysis which 
showed that the Cr content of the inner layer (15-17%) was greater than that of the 
substrate alloy (Tables 1 and 3) would support that mechanism. An alternative mechanism 
proposed by Field et al.24 for magnetite growth, whereby the aqueous medium has close 
access to the metal substrate through a network of interconnecting pores, does not appear to 
apply here. Manolescu and Mayer26 showed that contaminants, even those present at very 
low levels in the steam, could be concentrated by factors as large as lo4 at the oxide-metal 
interface by means of the interconnecting pores. However, in this study no traces of either Cl 
or S, which were the contaminants in the steam were detected at this interface in the XPS and 
SIMS analyses. 
As reported earlier the value of the parabolic rate constant determined for the SiC- 
finished surface was approximately twice that of the electropolished specimens. Since the 
population density of the crystals increased only slightly with time of exposure for both 
surface finishes, excepting the first period of 3 x lo3 h, this implies that the weight gain was 
due principally to the growth of the inner oxide layer at the oxide-metal interface. It is 
generally known that oxide layer formation and the homogeneity of the layer which 
1354 J. M. Lyons and J. Corish 
develops are both strongly dependent on the initial state of the metal surface” and this is, of 
course, borne out in the present study. None of the specimens exhibited parabolic kinetics in 
the initial stages of the reactions with the effect being more marked for those with the SiC- 
finished surfaces. This was probably due to the fact that the initiation of kinetic growth was 
inhibited by the prenucleated oxide film that was found to be present on the specimens prior 
to their exposure. The XPS analyses showed that this film was typically 2-3 nm in thickness 
with a high content of Crz03 and such films are known to decrease initial surface 
reactivities.‘6’30 A possible explanation for the slower start-up kinetics of the Sic-finished 
surface (Fig. 3) may lie in the nature of their prenucleated layers. Even though both surface 
finishes were degreased the organic contaminant was shown by XPS to be greater for the 
Sic-finished specimens. The very initial stages of the oxidative process, the adsorption of 
oxygen onto the surface and its subsequent dissolution in the underlying layers,44 may have 
been inhibited by the organic contaminants. 
Once the initial delay in the oxidative process had been overcome there was an increase 
in the kinetic growth rates for both surface finishes. After 6 x lo3 h exposures in the in situ 
rig, the growth of the oxide layer on the Sic-finished surface had increased over that of the 
electropolished surface and this was a reversal of the situation observed after 3 x 10’ h 
exposure. The population densities of the magnetite crystals were determined for both 
surface finishes by counting on known areas of micrographs and were found to be similar. 
The markedly different oxidation response of the Sic-finished surface was because the cold- 
working increases the surface roughness and changes the sub-surface region so that the rates 
of diffusion of oxide-forming elements are increased. The results here are in agreement with 
those of Foroulis and Uhlig45 who found that although cold-working did not affect the 
velocity of oxide growth on pure iron, it did enhance the rate of growth on iron alloys. 
Working with gas-metal interfaces, Warzee et al.,*’ Giggins and Pettit*’ and Ericsson** 
found that an increase in the number of grain boundaries caused by the cold-working 
process can also lead to short-circuit diffusion of chromium along these boundaries to give 
an oxide layer high in Cr203. The fact that the EPMA, XPS and SIMS analyses in the 
present work have shown that the chromium concentration in the inner oxide layer is higher 
than in the substrate metal suggests that a similar process has occurred here. 
Electropolishing removes the strained surface material and results in slower oxidation 
kinetics. 
Nevertheless the XPS and SIMS analyses showed the structures of the layers formed on 
the two surface finishes to be very similar with a slightly higher, 17% as against 15%, 
concentration of Cr in the inner layers on the Sic-finished surfaces. Thus the really 
significant difference between the surface finishes was in the kinetics of the development of 
the protective layers. The XPS and SIMS techniques also made it possible to conclude that 
the specimens exposed in the laboratory test rig had developed oxide layers broadly similar 
in structure to those found on the in situ specimens and that the growth of these layers could 
be rationalized by assuming the same growth mechanism. The full details of these 
characterization studies will be published elsewhere.38 
It is worth noting that in the laboratory test rig experiment with a raised 02 
concentration of 200 pg kg- ’ for 3 x lo3 h, there was no evidence of pitting on the 
surfaces of the 12Cr test specimens. This finding lends support to the presently accepted 
view that raised O2 concentrations do not necessarily give rise to pitting of the metal surface, 
provided that the concentrations of ionic contaminants and in particular of Cl- and SOd2- 
ions are maintained at very low levels. In this case study the feedwater supply to the test rig 
The corrosion of a 12Cr alloy 1355 
was of high purity, with a cation conductivity ~0.1 $3 cm-’ and Cl- and SOa2- ion 
concentrations < 2 pg kg-’ . This is an important finding for utilities that are compelled for 
operational reasons to change from all volatile alkaline treatment (AVT) to oxygenated 
treatment (OT). 
The O2 concentration in OT is generally between 50 pg kg- ’ and 150 pg kg- ‘, although 
O2 concentrations up to 400 pg kg-’ may be used for a short period of about 10 days during 
initial start-up of the procedure until all metal surfaces are passivated and the O2 
concentration becomes stable. EPRI guidelines for OT operation which draw heavily on 
German and Russian experience, specify high purity make-up water and feedwater cation 
conductivity of < 0.1 @ cm-‘. From the findings in this study this level of purity would 
appear to be adequate. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This study has provided a framework for the understanding of passivating oxide growth 
on 12Cr alloy used in turbine blade manufacture when this material is exposed to the 
corrosive carbonic acid environment in a working turbine. A two layered oxide product was 
formed of which the outer layer consisted of octahedral shaped magnetite crystals and was 
highly porous. All the experimental evidence suggests that these crystals were nucleated 
elsewhere in the turbine and transported to the growing sites in the liquid steam phase and 
deposited there. The inner oxide layer was fine-grained, compact and adhered to the 
substrate alloy with Cr203being a principal constituent and giving it passivating properties. 
While the two different surface preparations exposed (Sic-finished and electropolished) 
both grew the double oxide layer, the cold-worked specimens, which approximate to the 
surface finish on turbine blades, had a greater thickness of the passivating layer. Parabolic 
rate constants of k, = 1.05 x 10M5 mg2 cmp4 h-i and 0.50 x 10e5 mg2 cmp4 h- ’ were 
determined for the Sic-finished and electropolished surfaces, respectively. Exactly similar 
specimens exposed in control experiments in a laboratory test rig to analogous 
environments developed similar fine-grained compact and adhering layers, but without 
the outer layer of magnetite crystals. 
Acknowledgements-We are grateful to the Electricity Supply Board for their generous support and for their 
permission to carry out the in situ experimental work. We thank also Professor Nonnan Brown and Dr Brian 
Meenan of the University of Ulster at Coleraine for the XPS and SIMS work and the Department of Geography 
(Dr David Doll) and Electron Microscope Unit (Colin Reid) at Trinity College for their assistance. 
REFERENCES 
1. R. P. Dewey, T. H. McCloskey and N. F. Rieger, Paper 83-JPGC-PWR20. ASME, New York (1983). 
2. W. Engelke, H. Jesterich, K. Schleithoff and H. Terrnuehlen, Proc. Am. Power Co@ 45, 196 (1983). 
3. J. M. Lyons and J. Corish, Muter. Perf. (accepted). 
4. CEGB Modern Power Station Practice, Vol. 5, 2nd Edn, p. 213. Pergamon Press, Oxford (1971). 
5. J. Benard, Oxidation of Metals and Alloys (ed. D. L. Douglass), p. 1. ASM, Ohio (1971). 
6. A. Atkinson, Rev. mod. Phys. 57, 437 (1985). 
7. A. Bruckman, R. Emmerich and S. Mrowec, Oxid. Met. 5, 37 (1972). 
8. G. C. Wood, M. G. Hobby and B. Vaszko, J. Iron Steel Inst. 202, 685 (1964). 
9. A. U. Seybolt, J. electrochem. Sot. 107, 147 (1960). 
10. H. E. Evans, Paper MST/952. The Institute of Metals, London (1988). 
11. U. R. Evans, An Introduction of Metallic Corrosion, 2nd Edn, p. 148. Edward Arnold, London (1963). 
1356 J. M. Lyons and J. Corish 
12. 0. JonasCorrosion/84, paper no. 55, New Orleans (1984). 
13. 0. I. Martynova, 0. A. Povarov, V. S. Rabaenko, V. Sememov and N. A. Zaitsev, Therm. Engng 4, 
194 (1984). 
14. 0. A. Povarov, V. S. Rabenko and B. V. Bogomolov, Therm. Engng 6, 318 (1984). 
15. J. M. Harrison, J. F. Norton, R. T. Derricott and J. B. Marriott, Werkstoffu Korrosion 30, 785 (1979). 
16. M. J. Graham, G. I. Sproule, D. Caplan and M. Cohen, J. electrochem. Sot. 119, 883 (1972). 
17. S. T. Wlodek, Trans. metaN. Sor. 230, 1078 (1964). 
18. D. Caplan and G. I. Sproule, Oxid. Met. 9, 459 (1975). 
19. S. J. Allan and M. J. Dean, Proc. Int. Conf Behaviour of High Temperature Alloys in Aggressive 
Environments, p. 319. Metals Society, London (1980). 
20. M. Warzee, J. Hennault, M. Maurice and C. Sonnen, J. eiectrochem. Sot. 112, 670 (1965). 
21. C. S. Giggins and F. S. Pettit, Trans. metall. Sot. AIME 245, 2495 (1969). 
22. T. Ericsson, Oxid. Met. 2, 401 (1970). 
23. E. C. Potter and G. M. W. Mann, Proc. Ist Inr. Congr. on Metallic Corrosion, London (1961). 
24. E. M. Field, R. C. Stanley, A. M. Adams and D. R. Holmes, 2nd Int. Congress on Metallic Corrosion, New 
York (1963). 
25. J. E. Castle and H. G. Masterson, Corros. Sci. 6, 93 (1966). 
26. A. V. Manolescu and P. Mayer, Corrosion/dO, paper no. 174, Chicago, 173 (1980). 
27. Y. Asakura, H. Karasawa, M. Sakayami and S. Uchida, Corrosion 45, 119 (1989). 
28. A. Iseda, M. Kubota, Y. Hagase, S. Yamamoto and K. Yoshikawa, Sumitomo Search 36, 17 (1988). 
29. D. J. Lees, P. C. Rowlands and P. Humphrey, O.vid. Met. 27, 75 (1988). 
30. P. Berge, J. Ducreux and P. Saint-Paul, Water Chemistry II, paper 2. BNES, London (1980). 
31. J. F. Norton, L. Blidegen, S. Canetoli and P. D. Frampton. Werkstoff u Korrosion 32, 46 (1981). 
32. J. Congleton and R. N. Parkins, Corrosion 44, 290 (1988). 
33. T. Christman and G. Cragnolino, Corrosion 44, 345 (1988). 
34. D. W. Shoesmith, D. S. Marcey, D. C. Doern and M. G. Bailey, Corrosion 45, 149 (1989). 
35. W. E. Ruther, W. K. Soppett and T. F. Kassner, Corrosion 44, 791 (1988). 
36. C. Whiston, X-Ray Methods, p. 128. Wiley, Chichester (1987). 
37. B. J. Meenan, N. M. D. Brown, J. M. Lyons and J. Corish, Prog. in Analytical Chemistry in the Steel and 
Metals Industry (ed. R. Nauche), p. 371. European Commission, Luxemburg (1996). 
38. B. J. Meenan, N. M. D. Brown, J. M. Lyons and J. Corish, to be published. 
39. 0. A. Povarov, V. W. Semenov and B. V. Bogomoloy, Therm. Engng 33, 542 (1986). 
40. F. J. Pocock and S. Leedy. Proc. Int. Water Canf, Engineering Society of Western Pennsylvania (1971). 
41. N. Ramasubramanian. N. Preocanin and R. A. Davidson. J. electrochem. Sot. 132, 793 (1985). 
42. T. B Healy, private communication (1990). 
43. P. H. Effertz, Proc. 5th. Inr. Conf on Metallic Corrosion, Tokyo (1972). 
44. K. R. Lawless, Rep. Prog. Phys. 37, 321 (1974). 
45. Z. A. Foroulis and W. W. Uhlig, J. electrochem Sot. 112, 1177 (1965). 
