s .__ __ EB Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B 114 (1996) 252-258 
ELSEVIER NIOMI B Beam Interactions 
with Materials&Atoms 
Multiple beam ion channeling patterns 
M.B.H. Breese * 
SPM Unit, Nuclear Physics Laboratory, University of Oxford, Keble Road, Oxford, OX1 3RH, UK 
Received 5 December 1995 
Abstract 
This paper describes the production and uses of “multiple beam ” ion channeling patterns generated using a nuclear 
microprobe. Multiple beams are produced by splitting a single 3 MeV proton beam, diverging from the object aperture, into 
two or more beams with different trajectories. All the beams are incident on the surface of a 0.3 km thick [lOO] silicon 
crystal and produce superposed channeling patterns. Multiple beam patterns produced with the quadrupole lenses of the 
nuclear microprobe switched both off and on are shown, and the relationship between the different contrast observed under 
these two conditions is described. Multiple beam patterns are used to understand recent results showing channeling patterns 
produced through thin, rotated crystal bilayers and strained layers. 
1. Introduction 
One of the first confirmations of the effect of crystal 
structure on ion trajectories through matter was the produc- 
tion of “blocking” or “star” patterns using collimated, 
unfocused MeV ion beams. There has been considerable 
subsequent development of the use of ion channeling 
patterns to identify different types of crystal structures, as 
described in Ref. [I] and chapter 11 of Ref. [Z]. Other 
work on measuring and interpreting channeling patterns is 
reviewed in Ref. [3]. 
For channeling patterns recorded in transmission using 
thin crystals, an increased intensity of transmitted ions is 
produced where the incident beam is aligned with a chan- 
neling direction [4]. Channels away from the beam direc- 
tion show a reduced intensity owing to blocking [5]. 
There has been recent renewed interest in the produc- 
tion, interpretation and applications of ion channeling pat- 
terns through thin crystals using a nuclear microprobe 
[3,6,7]. The use of a focused, convergent proton beam has 
allowed the production of “selected area” and “conver- 
gent beam” patterns [3], which enabled coherent planar 
oscillations through thin silicon crystals to be directly 
observed. This same paper also described how a nuclear 
microprobe could be used for beam-crystal alignment by 
changing the incident angle of the focused beam, instead 
of tilting the crystal in the usual manner. 
* Tel.: + 44 1865 273439, fax: 44 1865 273418, e-mail: 
breese@physics.ox.ac.uk. Ion channeling patterns have also recently been used to 
observe and quantify the strain present in Si 1 _ .Ge,/Si, 
strained layers [7]. This was first modelled experimentally 
by recording channeling patterns produced by 3 MeV 
protons transmitted through two thin [ 1001 crystals, with a 
small rotation angle between them. A sample of 
Si,,s,Ge,,,/Si was used, which had a rotation angle at the 
bilayer interface along the off-normal directions due to 
strain-induced tetragonal lattice distortion. This sample 
was thinned to less than 1 km and used to produce 
channeling patterns with the beam aligned close to the 
[ 11 l] axes of the different layers present. These patterns 
enabled the amount of strain present within the Si,s,Ge,,,, 
layer to be measured. 
The first aim of this present paper is to relate the 
focusing action of a nuclear microprobe to the new types 
of channeling patterns produced here. The second aim is to 
add to the interpretation of the previous work on channel- 
ing patterns generated through rotated bilayers and strained 
layers, by comparison with multiple beam patterns pro- 
duced with the quadrupole lenses switched on. 
All the channeling patterns shown in this paper utilise 
the “doughnut” distribution produced when the 3 MeV 
proton beam is tilted slightly away from the silicon [lo01 
and [l lo] axes of a thin crystal. These doughnuts have 
been previously investigated by Rosner et al. [8] who 
studied the intensity distribution of 3.2 MeV protons trans- 
mitted through silicon crystals less than 1 km thick. It was 
noted that the angular extent of these doughnuts was 
proportional to the tilt angle of the [ 1 lo] axis away from 
the beam axis, for tilt angles less than the axial channeling 
critical angle. The azimuthal intensity distribution of these 
0168-583X/96/$15.00 Copyright Q 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
SD2 0168-583X(96)00052-3 
M.B.H. Breese / Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B I14 (1996) 252-258 253 
doughnuts was non-uniform and reflected the crystal sym- 
metry caused by the major channeling planes crossing at 
the crystal axis. 
2. Production of multiple beam channeling patterns 
The crystal used in this work was a 0.3 pm thick, 
self-supporting [IOO] silicon membrane, with a thin region 
approximately 8 mm in diameter. It was prepared at the 
University of Florida according to the method developed 
by Cheung [9]. Boron was diffused into one side of a blank 
silicon wafer at about lOOO”C, then a masked area was 
selectively etched to produce a dislocation-free thin layer. 
There is no detectable variation of the crystallographic 
orientation across the crystal using this procedure. For this 
crystal, the measured thickness typically varies by + 100 
nm. While this variation is large enough to detect coherent 
planar oscillations in channeling patterns [3], the crystal is 
too thick for coherent axial channeling oscillations to 
affect the observed patterns [lo]. 
The ion optics of nuclear microprobes are fully de- 
scribed in Ref. Ill]. It suffices to say here that a nuclear 
microprobe uses two to four magnetic quadrupole lenses to 
focus a low-divergence MeV light ion beam passing 
through an object aperture into a small spot with a higher 
convergence angle on the crystal surface, as shown in the 
lower half of Fig. 1. The beam divergence half-angle from 
the object aperture is 0, in the horizontal (x) direction and 
$c in the vertical ( y) direction. 
beam axis (m) 
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram showing the production of multiple 
beams in a nuclear microprobe. Only the horizontal direction is 
shown, where the beam angle to the axis is 0. The vertical 
direction, where the beam angle to the beam axis is 4, gives a 
similar effect. In the upper half, the quadrupole lenses arc switched 
off and in the lower half they are switched on. In both cases the 
separate beams hit the crystal surface and the resultant channeling 
pattern is observed on a viewing screen located 680 mm further 
downstream, unless otherwise stated. The vertical size of the 
aperture, lenses, crystal and the viewing screen is not to scale. The production of.multiple beams in a nuclear micro- 
probe with the quadrupole lenses switched off is shown 
schematically in the upper half of Fig. 1, and with the 
quadrupole lenses switched on in the lower half. In both 
cases, the beam diverges from an object aperture and 
uniformly illuminates a collimator aperture about 5 m 
downstream, which defines the beam divergence into the 
quadrupole lenses. For the production of multiple beams, a 
coarse mesh grid, or a series of drilled holes in a metal 
plate, or strands of wire are placed across the collimator 
aperture. The beam portions which are intercepted by the 
grid bars or the strands of wire are stopped, or heavily 
scattered so they are absent when the remaining beam hits 
the crystal surface. The separate beams which pass through 
the collimator aperture thus have a slightly different trajec- 
tories on to the crystal surface. 
For example, consider a 3 MeV proton beam passing 
through two half millimetre diameter holes, separated by 2 
mm, at the collimator aperture. The two separate beams 
which pass through the aperture differ in divergence angle 
by - 0.025” (0.4 mrad). This is very small compared with 
the [lOOI and [l lo] characteristic axial channeling angles 
in silicon of $, = 0.28” and 0.34” respectively for 3 MeV 
protons. With the quadnrpole lenses switched off, these 
two separate beams am incident on different parts of the 
crystal surface, but have approximately the same beam- 
crystal alignment, as shown in the upper half of Fig. 1. 
With the quadrupole lenses switched on, the focusing 
action of the quadrupole multiplet results in the beam on 
the crystal surface being a demagnified image of the object 
aperture, with a convergence half-angle of t+ = D,0, in 
the x direction and & = D,$, in the y direction, where 
D,, D, are the demagnifications in the x and y directions 
respectively. The Oxford nuclear microprobe uses a triplet 
configuration of quadrupole lenses [12] with demagnifica- 
tions of D, - 80 and D, - 23. Protons with different 
divergence angles into the quadrupole triplet are thus 
focused to the same point on the crystal surface, but with a 
much greater difference in divergence angle, as shown in 
the lower half of Fig. 1. For the same two beams separated 
by 0.025” at the collimator aperture, the demagnifying 
effect of the lenses means that the beams would be sepa- 
rated by 2” in the horizontal direction on the crystal 
surface and - 0.6” in the vertical direction. These angles 
are much larger than the axial channeling angles for 3 
MeV protons and so are unsuitable for these types of 
patterns, as described below. Instead, strands of wire, with 
a diameter of 150 pm across the collimator aperture, were. 
used to produce the multiple beam channeling patterns 
produced with the lenses switched on. These produced 
focused beams, each separated by 0.15” in the horizontal 
beam direction on the crystal surface. This is less than the 
[ 1001 and [ 1 lo] axial channeling angles, which is a neces- 
sary condition for producing the multiple beam patterns 
described in Section 3.2. 
Fig. 2 summarises the spatial and angular relationship 
254 M.B.H. Breese/NucI. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 114 (I996) 252-258 
t (iio) 
g4-L (llO>- 
-0 -to 
Fig. 2. Examples of (a) spatial and (b) angular representations of three separate beams incident on the surface of a [IOOJ silicon crystal, for 
which only the {I IO} planes are shown. In this example the beams are channeled in the horizontally-running (110) planes but not the 
vertically-rumtiug (li0) planes. The coordinates of the separate beams with the quadrupole lenses switched off are shown by the hollow 
squares and with the quadrupole lenses switched on by the smaller, solid squares. 
between two separate beams on the crystal surface. With 
the quadrupole lenses switched off, the multiple beams 
have approximately the same divergence angle on the 
crystal surface (Fig. 2b) but are incident at different posi- 
tions (Fig. 2a). With the quadrupole lenses switched on, 
the multiple beams have widely different divergence an- 
gles (Fig. 2b) but hit the crystal at the same position (Fig. 
2a). A proton beam current of lo-100 pA was used to 
produce all the channeling patterns. The channeling pat- 
terns were produced on a fluorescent viewing screen con- 
sisting of willemite (ZnSiO, : Mn), located 680 mm down- 
stream of the crystal, as shown in Fig. 1. The patterns were 
each photographed using 25 ASA technical pan black and 
white film with a 30 s exposure. Two +4 diopter lenses 
were used to enlarge the patterns on the camera film. 
Fig. 3. Patterns recorded through a single, 0.3 pm thick, silicon crystal with the quadrupole lenses switched off, except in Fig. 3f. (a> Three 
separate beams hitting the viewing screen. (b) Showing planar oscillations by the three beams within the horizontally-running (1 IO) planes. 
(c) Three interlocking rings produced by aligning the crystal [IOO] axis 0.15” away from the beam axis, within the (I IO) planes. Cd) Five 
separate beams hitting the viewing screen. (e) “Olympic” symbol produced with these tive beams aligned close to the [I IO] axis. (f) Pattern 
produced with the same five beams aligned close to the [loo] axes and with the quadrupole Ienses partially switched on. This pattern is 
discussed in Section 3.3. 
3. Multiple beam channeling patterns 
3.1. Lenses switched off 
Fig. 3a shows three separate proton beams hitting the 
viewing screen, with the crystal removed from the beam 
axis. A metal plate located at the collimator aperture with 
half millimeter diameter holes, drilled 2 mm apart, was 
used to produce these separate beams, with the lenses 
switched off. The beams differ in angle by 0.025” and each 
has an angular width of 0.006”. In Fig. 3b the 
horizontally-running (110) planes were aligned with the 
beam axis. Because the separate beams hit different re- 
gions of the crystal, they travel through slightly different 
thicknesses and so emerge with different angles to the 
(110) planes owing to their coherent oscillatory motion, as 
described in detail in Ref. [3]. The pattern in Fig. 3c was 
recorded under the same conditions as Fig. 3b except the 
crystal [lOO] axis was aligned 0.15” away from the beam 
axis, such that each separate beam produced a doughnut 
distribution. Each of these three doughnuts was produced 
from different locations across the crystal surface and so 
they appear as overlapping rings. 
Fig. 3d shows five separate proton beams hitting the 
viewing screen, with the crystal removed from the beam 
axis and the lenses switched off. The hole spacing was 
again 2 mm with hole sizes of 0.5 mm. Fig. 3e shows the 
channeling pattern produced by these five beams aligned 
0.2” away from the crystal [ 1 lo] axis. Each beam produces 
a doughnut distribution, resulting in the observed ‘ ’ Olympic’ ’ symbol comprising five interlocking rings. 
Figs. 3d and 3e were recorded using a distance of 200 mm 
between the crystal and the viewing screen, which is 
considerably a shorter distance than for the other patterns 
in this paper. This is because at a distance of 680 mm, the 
separate rings merge together and are not resolved. 
3.2. Lenses switched on 
Multiple beam channeling patterns produced with the 
quadrupole lenses of the nuclear microprobe switched on, 
so that two, or three, separate proton beams were focused 
to the same point on the crystal surface, are now described. 
Each beam is separated by 0.15” in the horizontal beam 
direction and the angular width of each beam is 0.04”. 
Fig. 4a shows two separate proton beams hitting the 
viewing screen, with the crystaf removed from the beam 
axis and the lenses switched on. The (110) planes were 
then aligned with the beam axis, and the nest of Fig. 4 
shows channeling patterns produced by tilting the crystal 
[loo] axis through small angles towards, and through, 
alignment with the beam axis. In Fig. 4b, both beams are 
aligned too far away from the [lo01 axis to project dough- 
nut distributions but in Fig. 4c, the right hand beam 
projects a faint doughnut distribution with a large angular 
diameter. This doughnut becomes stronger and has a pro- 
gressively smaller diameter in Figs. 4d and 4e as the right 
hand beam becomes more aligned with the [IOO] axis. In 
Fig. 4e tbe left hand beam also projects a doughnut 
distribution with a larger diameter than the corresponding h4.B.H. Breese/Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B I14 (1996) 252-258 255 
Fig. 4. Patterns recorded through a single, 0.3 Frn thick, silicon crystal as a function of tilt angle to the beam axis, within the (110) planes. 
Two proton beams, shown in Fig. 4a, separated by +0.075’ about the beam axis, were focused on the crystal surface, with the lenses 
switched on. The crystal [IO01 tilt angle to the beam axis is: (b) -O&Y, (c) -O.ZO”, (d) -0.17”, (e) -O.I3”, (f) -O.OS”, (g> -l-0.02”, (h) 
+0.2T. 
256 M.B.H. Breese / Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 114 (1996) 252-258 
right hand beam, creating alternate bright and dark rings 
centred on the [ 1001 axis. In Fig. 4f, the right hand beam is 
aligned with the [lo01 axis, producing a bright spot, while 
the left hand beam projects a bright doughnut distribution 
around it. In Fig. 4g, the two beams are aligned on 
opposite sides of the [lOOI axis and no rings are observed 
since the intensity distributions produced by the two beams 
overlap. In Fig. 4h, the right hand beam is too far away 
from the [lOOI axis to produce a doughnut distribution, 
while the left hand beam does produce one. At further tilt 
angles in the same direction, both beams are channeled in 
the (110) planes and produce no doughnut distributions. 
Fig. 5 shows a similar sequence of channeling patterns 
produced by aligning the [l lo] axis of the same crystal 
close to the beam axis, and tilting within the horizontally- 
running (100) planes. Since the [ 1 lo] axis is wider than the 
[lo01 axis, three beams, separated by 0.15”, were used to 
produce these patterns, instead of two for the [lOOI axis. A 
similar series of bright and dark rings, centred on the [ 1 lo] 
axis, is observed in this sequence of patterns. 
3.3. Discussion 
With the quadrupole lenses switched off, a series of 
bright rings, with similar diameters but offset from each 
other, are observed in the multiple beam channeling pat- 
terns shown in Fig. 3. The rings are offset because the 
patterns generated by the separate beams are produced 
from different parts of the crystal. They have a similar 
diameter because the separate beams have nearly the same 
beam-crystal alignment. With the lenses switched on, a series of bright and dark 
rings with different diameters but centred on the same 
point on the screen are observed in the multiple beam 
channeling patterns in Figs. 4 and 5. They are centred on 
the same point because the patterns generated by the 
separate beams are produced from the same part of the 
crystal. The rings have a different diameter because the 
separate beams have widely differing angles to the [ 1001 or 
[llO] axes. 
An example of an intermediate condition between the 
two discussed so far, where the lenses have been either 
switched off, or used to focus the multiple beams to the 
same point on the crystal surface, is shown in Fig. 3f. This 
shows a multiple beam pattern produced using the same 
five beams as in Figs. 3d and 3e. In this case the lenses 
were switched on, but not to the strengths required to focus 
the separate beams on the crystal surface. All the different 
beams thus hit different parts of the crystal surface with 
different angles and the resultant pattern is a superposition 
of five different patterns in which there is no similarity or 
common centre. 
4. Interpretation of channeling patterns through ro- 
tated bilayers 
In addition to being an interesting example of the use 
of a nuclear microprobe to produce previously unobserved 
patterns, the use of multiple beams produced with the 
quadrupole lenses switched on also helps in the under- 
standing of previous work [7] in characterising the effects 
Fig 
ho] :. 5. Patterns recorded through a single, 0.3 @rn thick, silicon crystal as a function of tilt angle to the beam axis, within 
izontally-running (100) planes. Three proton beams, each separated by O.lS’, with the central beam on the beam axis, were focused 
crystal surface. The crystal [l 101 tilt angle to the beam axis is: (a> - OH”, (b) - 0.50”, (c) - 0.34”, (d) - 0.28”, (e) - 0.22”, (f) + 0 
+ 0.14”, (h) + 0.25”. Ignore the far left hand side where the pattern is chopped off by the limited extent of the viewing screen. the 
M&H. Breese/Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B I14 (1996) 252-258 257 
Fig. 6. (a) Pattern generated through a bilayer comprising two, 
individual, 0.3 pm thick, [lOOI silicon crystals, with a rotation 
angle of 0.25” between them [7]. The front and back crystal [lOC] 
axes were respectively aligned - 0.15” and + 0.10” above and 
below the beam axis. (b) Same as Fig. 4d, but rotated anticlock- 
wise through 90” for comparison with Fig. 6a. 
of rotated bilayers on channeling patterns. A rotated bi- 
layer interface is the dechanneling mechanism used to 
character&e strained layers using ion channeling analysis, 
as described in Ref. [13]. 
An example of this type of pattern is shown in Fig. 6a. 
This was recorded through a bilayer comprising two, indi- 
vidual 0.3 pm thick [lOO] silicon crystals, with a rotation 
angle of 0.25” between them. The front and back crystal 
[lOO] axes were respectively aligned -0.15” and +O.lOO 
above and below the vertical beam axis, so that the [loo] 
axes of the two crystals were on opposite sides of the 
beam axis. A doughnut distribution was projected by the 
front crystal into the back crystal, giving to two beam 
portions within th.e vertically-running (iio) planes of the 
back crystal. These are the lower bright regions within the 
(170) planes in Fig. 6a and the lower extent of the 
doughnut distribution, which lies on the beam axis. This 
portion on the beam axis projects another doughnut distri- 
bution around the back crystal [lo01 axis, visible in the 
upper region of this pattern. The resultant channeling 
pattern produced through both layers is thus a superposi- 
tion of the different patterns produced by the two separate 
beam fractions within the (170) planes of the back crystal. 
Since the beam which enters the (170) planes of the 
back crystal in Fig. 6a is separated into two portions 
travelling through the same position, but with different 
angles with respect to the beam axis, the mechanism of 
pattern formation is very similar to that of the multiple 
beam channeling patterns in Fig. 4. For example, Fig. 4d 
was produced with two separate beams entering the (110) 
planes of a crystal layer and emerging from the same 
point, and gives similar behaviour. It is shown again in 
Fig. 6b, but rotated by 90” for easier comparison with Fig. 
6a. In Fig. 6a, the upper of the two beam portions of the 
doughnut projected from the front crystai into the (ITO) 
planes of the back crystal is aligned approximately 0.10” below the back crystal [IOO] axis. Similarly in Fig. 6b the 
upper of the two multiple beam portions projected into the 
(110) planes of the single crystal is aligned approximately 
0.10” below the [loo] axis. In both Figs. 6a and 6b this 
beam portion has a similar alignment to the back crystal 
axis and so similar size doughnut distributions are pro- 
duced by the back crystal in both patterns. 
The multiple beam patterns in Figs. 4 and 5 (and Fig. 
6b) may be considered to be the limiting cases for produc- 
ing channeling patterns through rotated bilayers, such as 
shown in Fig. 6a. This is because in the multiple beam 
patterns there is no dechanneling caused by the proportion 
of the doughnut intensity distribution outside the (170) 
channeling angle of the back layer. This makes the multi- 
ple beam patterns in Figs. 4 and 5 (and Fig. 6b) less 
blurred than the strained layer patterns in Fig. 6a and in 
Ref. [7], for the same crystal thickness. See, for example, 
the centre of the [ 1001 axis, which is uniformly dark in Fig. 
6b but more blurred in Fig. 6a owing to a higher scattered 
beam fraction. Another reason is the less well defined 
proton trajectories which make up the beam portions within 
the back crystal (liO> planes in the rotated bilayer pattern 
in Fig. 6a owing to scattering through the front crystal, 
compared with the sharply defined trajectories in Fig. 6b. 
5. Conclusions 
Multiple beam ion channeling patterns, generated with 
the quadrupole lenses of a nuclear microprobe switched on 
and off, have been described and the relationship between 
them has been explained. It has been demonstrated that 
two separate beam portions travelling through the same 
spatial location within channeling planes of a crystal layer 
gives rise to channeling patterns which can be considered 
as the superposition of the patterns produced by the indi- 
vidual beams. Multiple beam channeling patterns produced 
with the quadrupole lenses switched on are able to help in 
the interpretation of channeling patterns recorded through 
rotated bilayers. 
Acknowledgement 
Prof. L.E. Seiberling, from the Physics Department, 
University of Florida is gratefully acknowledged for sup- 
plying the thin silicon membranes used in this work. 
References 
[l] C.S. Barrett, R.M. Mueller and W. White, J. Appl. Phys. 39 
(1968) 4695. 
[2] D.V. Morgan (ed.), Channeling, Theory, Observation and 
Applications (Wiley, London, 1973). 
258 M.B.H. Breese/Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 114 (1996) 252-258 
[3] M.B.H. Breese, P.J.C. King, G.W. Grime, P.J.M. Smulders, 
L.E. Seiberling and M.A. Boshart, Phys. Rev. B 53 (1996) 
8267. 
[4] G. Deamaley, I.V. Mitchell, R.S. Nelson, B.W. Farmery and 
M.W. Thompson, Philos. Mag. 18 (1968) 985. 
[5] D.S. Gemmell and R.E. Holland, Phys. Rev. Led. 14 (1965) 
945. [8] J.S. Rosner, W.M. Gibson, J.A. Golovchenko, A.N. Goland 
and H.E. Wegner, Phys. Rev. B 18 (1978) 1066. 
[9] N.W. Cheung, Rev. Sci. Instr. 51 (1980) 1212. 
[lo] J.F. Barrett, Phys. Rev. B 3 (1971) 1527. 
[ll] M.B.H. Breese, D.N. Jamieson and P.J.C. King, Materials 
Analysis Using a Nuclear Microprobe (Wiley, New York, 
1995). 
[6] M.B.H. Breese, P.J.C. King, G.W. Grime, L.E. Seiberling [12] G.W. Grime, M. Dawson, M. Marsh, I.C. McArthur and F. 
and M.A. Boshart, Appl. Phys. Lett. 67 (1995) 2132. Watt, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 54 (1991) 52. 
[7] M.B.H. Breese, P.J.C. King, and P.J.M. Smulders, unpub- [13] S.T. Picraux, B.L. Doyle and J.Y. Tsao, Semiconductors and 
lished. Metals, vol. 33 AT & T Bell Labs. (1991) chap. 3. 
