Ultrasonics 34 (1996) 177-185 
New methods of ultrasonic welding of metal and plastic materials 
Jiromaru Tsujino *, Tetsugi Ueoka, Koichi Hasegawa, Yuki Fujita, Toshiyuki Shiraki, 
Takaaki Okada and Toshiki Tamura 
Kanagawa University, Faculty of Engineering, 3-27-l Rokkakubashi, Yokohama 221, Japan 
Abstract 
New ultrasonic welding methods of metal and plastic materials have been proposed by the author and have shown their 
effectiveness. For welding of thick and large metal specimens, (1) an ultrasonic butt welding method of joining thick metal 
specimens end to end is proposed. Large capacity vibration sources and solid-state power amplifiers of 50,100 kW have been 
developed. (2) The welding method of using two vibration systems crossed at a right angle is effective, and 10 mm thick aluminum 
plates have been joined successfully. For medium size metal welding specimens, (3) complex vibration welding tips have been 
shown to be very effective, and one-dimensional complex vibration systems are developed to simplify the systems. For welding of 
small metal specimens, (4) higher vibration frequency, and complex vibration wire bonding systems are proposed and it is shown 
that they are significantly effective. Bonding systems of 60 to 600 kHz have been designed. For welding of plastic materials, (5) high 
frequency and two-vibration-system welding methods are effective. 
Keywords: Ultrasonic butt welding; Two-vibration-system ultrasonic welding; High frequency welding; Complex vibration ultrasonic 
welding; Ultrasonic wire bonding; Ultrasonic plastic welding 
1. Introduction 
New ultrasonic welding methods of metal and plastic 
materials have been proposed [l-3] and have shown 
their effectiveness as follows. For welding of thick and 
large metal specimens, (1) an ultrasonic butt welding 
method of joining thick metal specimens end to end has 
been proposed and has been shown to be very effective 
in joining thick welding specimens end to end [2-71. 
Using this method, large capacity vibration sources 
and power amplifiers of 50, 100 kW, aluminum plate 
specimens of 6 mm thickness and 400 mm width were 
successfully welded by changing the welding tip driving 
positions. 
For welding of medium to large metal specimens, (2) 
a welding method of using two vibration systems crossed 
at a right angle, which drives the welding specimens 
from their upper and lower sides simultaneously, enabled 
10 mm thick aluminum plates to be joined successfully 
and also 1.0 mm thick and 100 mm wide plates to be 
* Corresponding author. Fax: +81-45-491-7915; 
e-mail: tsujino@cc.kanagawa-u.ac.jp 
0041-624X/96/%15.00 0 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
SSDI 0041-624X(95)00069-0 joined continuously with uniform strength along the 
specimen width [ l-3,8]. 
For medium size metal welding specimens, (3) complex 
vibration welding tips vibrating in (a) elliptical to circular 
loci or (b) rectangular to square loci were shown to be 
very effective. Bonding methods of thin wire specimens, 
and thick and large specimens, and one-dimensional 
complex vibration systems have been developed to 
simplify the systems and have been shown to be effective 
for successful welding [ 31. 
For welding of small metal specimens, such as ultra- 
sonic wire bonding of integrated circuits or electronic 
devices, the following bonding equipment is effective. 
(4) An ultrasonic wire bonding system, using a vibration 
frequency higher than 60 kHz which is used in con- 
ventional wire bonding systems, and using complex 
vibration welding tips vibrating in (a) elliptical to circular 
loci or (b) rectangular to square loci has been proposed 
and has been shown to be significantly effective. Bonding 
systems with complex vibration welding tips of 40 to 
190 kHz, and high frequency linear vibration welding 
tips of up to 330,600 kHz have been designed. Using 
this equipment, the required vibration velocity becomes 
178 J. Tsujino et al. 1 Ultrasonics 34 (1996) 177-185 
smaller and the required welding time shorter compared 
with conventional bonding systems. The frequency 
characteristics of the required vibration amplitude and 
vibration velocity are revealed from 40 to 600 kHz 
[3,9-133. 
For welding of plastic materials, (5) a high frequency 
and two-vibration-system welding method is effective 
[ 1,143. Two-vibration-system welding equipment of 
90 kHz, with upper and lower vibration sources with six 
ultrasonic transducers, is designed and it has been shown 
that the required vibration velocity of 90 kHz is about 
l/3 that of a 27 kHz welding system. The two-vibration- 
system welding method with different frequencies and 
vibration direction crossed at a right angle, using 90 kHz 
upper longitudinal and 20 kHz lower torsional vibration 
systems, is also effective. 
2. Ultrasonic butt welding of various large metal plate 
specimens 
Ultrasonic butt welding is adequate for welding thick 
specimens, such as over 10 mm thick, end to end. Using 
a conventional ultrasonic lapped spot welding method 
it is possible to weld up to 2 or 3 mm thick plate 
specimens; however, large and thick specimens are 
impossible to weld in this way because the driving surface 
of the upper specimen cannot endure the increasing 
driving force of the thick weldment and the increasing 
shear displacement along the thickness of the specimen. 
The ultrasonic butt welding system consists of one 
powerful ultrasonic vibration source, an upper passive 
vibration system and a welding frame with hydraulic 
static pressure sources for clamping welding specimens 
between the upper and lower vibration system and for 
inducing static clamping pressure on a welding surface 
(as shown in Fig. 1). The ultrasonic vibration source 
consists of eight bolt-clamped Langevin-type PZT trans- 
ducers (BLT) of 60 mm diameter and a radial-to-longitu- 
dinal converter as a vibration power accumulator. The 
dimensions of the welding tip are 20 mm thickness and 
52 mm width. The 15 kHz vibration source with eight 
transducers is 542 mm in diameter and 28.5 kg in weight. 
The vibration amplitude is measured by ring-type mag- 
netic vibration detectors installed in various positions 
in the vibration systems. The vibration source is driven 
by a 50 kW or 100 kW static induction thyristor power 
amplifier. 
The weld condition of aluminum plate specimens of 
6 mm thickness and 400 mm width, joined end to end 
by shifting the welding tip driving positions along the 
specimen width, is shown in Fig. 2. Weld strength is 
almost uniform and almost equal to the aluminum 
specimen strength. 
Figs. 3(a) and (b) show the cross-sections of different 
metal specimens. Aluminum, anticorrosive aluminum Fig. 1. Arrangement of ultrasonic butt welding equipment with a 
15 kHz vibration source using eight bolt-clamped Langevin type PZT 
transducers of 60mm diameter, installed in the lower part of the 
welding system. 
Driving side specimen 
400 mm width I 
Fig. 2. Weld conditions of an aluminum plate specimen of 6 mm 
thickness and 400mm width joined using a, 15 kHz butt welding 
system by shifting the welding tip driving positions along the 
specimen width. 
alloy, copper and steel plate specimens were welded 
successfully with almost equal weld strength of aluminum 
or anticorrosive alloy specimens end to end. Burrs are 
produced on the upper and lower welding parts of the 
aluminum-plate side mainly due to the higher hardness 
of the copper or steel specimens. The mechanical charac- 
teristics of the welded specimens are about the same as 
the base metal specimens, and the hardness adjacent to 
the weldment decreases slightly according to welding 
conditions. The temperature rise at the welding surface 
in the aluminum specimen is estimated to be about 
480°C at least from the hardness measured adjacent to 
the welding surface. Using the usual vibration amplitude 
J. Tsujino et al. 1 Ultrasonics 34 (1996) 177-185 179 
(4 
64 
Fig. 3. Weld conditions of aluminum, anticorrosive aluminum, copper 
and steel plate specimens of 6 mm thickness. (a) Cross-section of pure 
aluminum and copper specimen. (b) Cross-section of anticorrosive 
aluminum alloy and copper specimens welded using a large vibration 
amplitude. 
under 20 urn (peak-to-zero value), the welded surface is 
usually flat and smooth but disordered and inclusions 
are produced in the case of a large vibration amplitude 
of 25 to 30 urn, as seen in Fig. 3(b). 
The welding condition of pure aluminum and steel 
plate specimens of 6 mm thickness is shown in Fig. 4. 
The relationship between vibration amplitude, input 
power and weld strength of the plate specimens is shown 
in the figure. The maximum weld strength obtained is 
almost equal to the aluminum specimen strength at a 
vibration amplitude of about 15.5 to 17 urn for aluminum-- 
steel specimens. The required vibration amplitude for 
aluminumcopper specimens is higher than that of 
aluminum-steel specimens due to the larger heat con- 
ductivity of copper, which is about eight times that of 
steel. Thin burrs are produced on either side of the 
aluminum specimen due to the difference in hardness Vibration amplitude ( pm ) 
Fig. 4. Welding conditions of aluminum and steel plate specimens of 
6 mm thickness. 
of the specimens used. In the case of anticorrosive 
aluminum and copper specimens, burrs are produced 
both sides of the specimens. The required input power 
for joined aluminum, copper and steel plate specimens 
is about 5 kW cm-’ and 4 kW cmm2. 
3. Ultrasonic welding with two vibration systems 
The welding equipment with two vibration systems 
is significantly effective for joining thick and large 
specimens and it is also very effective for joining wide 
plate specimens with uniform weld strength successfully. 
The configuration of a two-vibration-system welding 
equipment is shown in Fig. 5. The ultrasonic welding 
equipment consists of an upper 27 kHz and a lower 
15 kHz longitudinal vibration systems crossed at a right 
27 kHz upper vibration system using 6 BLT transducers 
40 mm dia. 27 kHz 1 h length 
longitudinal, d supporters 
mm dia. 15 1 h length 
longitudinal vibration rod. 
15 kHz lower vibration system using a 70 mm 
diameter bolt-clamped Langevin type transducer 
Fig. 5. Ultrasonic lapped spot welding equipment using two longi- 
tudinal vibration systems; ultrasonic welding equipment with 27 kHz 
and 15 kHz vibration systems crossed at a right angle. 
180 J. Tsujino et al. / Ultrasonics 34 (1996) 177-185 
angle, and a welding frame with a hydraulic static 
clamping pressure source. An upper 27 kHz vibration 
system has a one-wavelength longitudinal vibration rod 
with welding tips at its center, a stepped horn with a 
vibration velocity transforming ratio of 4 and a vibration 
source with six bolt-clamped Langevin type PZT trans- 
ducers of 40 mm diameter. A lower 15 kHz vibration 
system has a one-wavelength longitudinal vibration rod 
with welding tips at its center, a stepped horn with 
a vibration velocity transforming ratio of 4 and a 
bolt-clamped Langevin-type PZT transducer of 70 mm 
diameter. These vibration systems are driven by 4 and 
5 kW power amplifiers independently. 
Welding specimens are inserted between upper and 
lower welding tips and driven parallel to welding surfaces 
at crossed directions for inducing mutual ultrasonic 
vibration velocity between upper and lower welding 
surfaces by these welding tips under static clamping 
pressure. The welding position is shifted along the 
specimen width for continuous multi-spot welding. 
Weld strength distributions along 100 mm wide pure 
aluminum plate specimens welded at ten positions using 
the two-vibration-system of 27 kHz and 15 kHz are 
shown in Fig. 6. Bold marks show that the specimens 
were broken at the specimen part; not at the weldment 
under tensile strength test. Using welding times of 0.3 
to 0.5 s, the specimens were joined successfully with 
uniform weld strength of about 50 to 60 kgf along 
the specimen width. Excessive welding time over 0.6 s 
causes damages to the specimens and the weld strength 
decreases. Uniform weld strength along the specimen 
width could not be obtained using only one vibration 
system. 
The weld strength distributions along 100 mm wide 
pure and anticorrosive aluminum plate specimens, 
welded at ten positions with metal block clamping vices 
at the free edges using the two-vibration-systems, are 
shown in Fig. 7. Using the metal block clamping vices 
to change the vibration mode at the welding tip driving 
Specimen position ( mm ) The converter part of 21.5 mm diameter has 18 
diagonal slits at its circumference of vibration node part, 
and has near longitudinal and torsional resonance fre- 
quencies. It is driven by a longitudinal driving vibration 
system. These slits are cut by an electrosparking machine 
to have 10 mm length, 0.5 mm width and 2.0 mm depth. 
The converter vibrates in a coupled mode of longitudinal 
and torsional vibrations. The free edge surface vibrates 
in a linear or elliptical-to-circular manner according to 
vibration amplitudes and the vibration phases of the 
longitudinal and torsional vibration modes as the driving 
frequency is altered. 
Fig. 6. Weld strength along 1OOmm wide pure aluminum plate Fig. 9 shows the relationships between the driving 
specimens welded at ten positions using 27 kHz and 15 kHz frequency and the longitudinal and torsional vibration 
vibration systems. amplitudes at a free vibration edge of a longitudinal- 150 
and anticorrosive aluminum plate specimen 
27 kHz vib. amp. : 10.5 Km ! Welding . 
9 100 _ 15 kHz vib. amp. 
Clamping force : : 10.51.lm--. >r;s 
110 kgf 
10 dr ivi no ooslt ens ‘i Clamped at free 
0 edges by vises 
OM 
Specimen position ( mm ) 10 
Fig. 7. Weld strength along 100 mm wide pure and anticorrosive 
aluminum plate specimens welded at ten positions clamped at the free 
edges by vices using a 27 kHz and 15 kHz vibration system. 
point, uniform weld strength distributions are obtained 
at a welding time of 0.5 and 0.6 s, but are not obtained 
without the vices. Excessive welding time causes damages 
to the specimens and the weld strength decreases. All 
specimens were broken at the specimen part; not at the 
welding surfaces under tensile strength test. 
4. One-dimensional complex vibration ultrasonic welding 
system 
The welding characteristics of metal plate specimens 
are significantly improved by an ultrasonic lapped spot 
welding system using a complex vibration welding tip. 
To simplify the configuration of the complex vibration 
welding system, one-dimensional complex vibration 
welding systems of 27 kHz, which vibrate in an elliptical 
or circular locus, are studied. A one-dimensional 
converter can also be obtained using longitudinal- 
to-transverse vibration converters. 
An arrangement of a 27 kHz one-dimensional longi- 
tudinal-to-torsional vibration converter with diagonal 
slits at a longitudinal vibration node part, and with 
complex vibration welding tips at the free vibration 
edge, is shown in Fig. 8. 
J. Tsujino et al. 1 Ultrasonics 34 ( 1996) 177-185 181 
Longitudinal-torsional complex 
vibration rod I steel SK4 I 
llelding plate 
S;n specimens 
‘Anvil 
Fig. 8. Arrangement of a 27 kHz longitudinal to torsional vibration converter with diagonal slits at a longitudinal vibration node part with 
complex vibration welding tips at the free vibration edge. 
Vibration frequency ( kHz ) 
Fig. 9. Relationship between the driving frequency and longitudinal 
and torsional vibration amplitudes at a free vibration edge of a 
longitudinal-torsional vibration converter. 
torsional vibration converter measured by a laser 
Doppler vibrometer. Longitudinal vibration is measured 
at the free edge surface and the torsional vibration is 
measured at a small surface normal to the circumference 
cut near to the edge. These vibration amplitudes become 
maximum at the near-frequency range and the vibration 
locus becomes circular between these maximum driving 
frequencies. 
The vibration locus shapes and the vibration phase 
difference between longitudinal and torsional vibrations, 
as the driving frequency is altered, are shown in Fig. 10. 
Vibration locus shapes are observed by an optical micro- 
scope. The vibration locus becomes circular near to the 
driving frequency in the case where the phase difference 
between the longitudinal and torsional vibration is near 
to 90”, and linear at a lower frequency in the direction 
of the longitudinal vibration, and linear also at a higher 
frequency but in the direction of torsional vibration. 
Fig. 11 shows the welded condition of aluminum plate 
specimens of 0.5 mm thickness welded by welding tips 
of linear and circular loci under the same vibration 
amplitude of 6.0 pm. The obtained weld strengths by a 
welding tip of circular locus are larger than those joined - 01 I I I 
26.60 27.00 27.20 27.40 
Vibration frequency ( kHz ) 
Fig. 10. Relationship among driving frequency, vibration locus shapes 
and vibration phase difference between longitudinal and torsional 
vibrations. 
(4 fb) 
Fig. 11. Weld conditions of aluminum plate specimens of 1.0 mm 
thickness joined by welding tips of linear (a) and circular (b) vibration 
loci under the same vibration amplitude of 6.0 mm. 
by a conventional welding system whose welding tip 
vibration is linear. 
5. Ultrasonic wire bonding using complex and 
higher-frequency vibration welding tips 
Ultrasonic wire bonding using the same frequency 
complex vibration welding system of 190 kHz and a 
high frequency linear vibration welding tip of up to 
182 J. Tsujino et al. / Ultrasonics 34 (1996) 177-185 
600 kHz are studied for improving the welding character- 
istics. Complex vibration welding tip locus shapes are 
controlled from linear-to-elliptical, and circular by regu- 
lating the driving vibration systems. Welding specimens 
of 0.1 mm diameter aluminum wire were welded success- 
fully by this high frequency and complex vibration 
welding equipment. The required vibration velocity of 
the complex vibration system is about half to one-third 
compared with linear vibration systems. The required 
vibration velocity of the high-frequency bonding system 
of 600 kHz decreases to about one-fifth that of the 
60 kHz conventional bonding system. The required weld- 
ing time of the 600 kHz system was shorter than that of 
the 60 kHz system because of the large number of 
repetitions of vibration stress of the higher-frequency 
system. 
Using high frequency and complex vibration systems, 
the weld strength becomes independent of the direction 
between welding tip vibration and wire length. The 
deformation of the welded specimen (specimen height) 
for a maximum weld strength was 40 to 20% of the wire 
diameter and about same in these frequencies [3,13]. 
Furthermore, using these high frequency and complex 
vibration methods, the weld strength of wire bonding 
becomes independent of the difference in direction 
between welding tip vibration and wire length. The one- 
dimensional complex vibration system may be con- 
structed using a one-dimensional complex vibration 
system such as a longitudinal-transverse of a longitudinal- 
torsional vibration converter [ 33. 
Complex vibration bonding systems consist of a com- 
plex transverse vibration welding tip and two driving 
systems crossed at a right angle, as shown in Fig. 12. 
The 190 kHz vibration systems are 7 mm in diameter 
and 1.5 in longitudinal vibration wavelength. A free-free 
third-mode transverse complex vibration rod of 1.2 mm 
in diameter, whose free edge is a welding tip, is driven 
at a center vibration loop position in two directions 
crossed at a right angle through quarter-wavelength 
longitudinal vibration rods. These rods prevent mutual 
interference between the two driving systems. These 
Fig. 12. Arrangement of a 190 kHz ultrasonic wire bonding system 
using a complex vibration welding tip driven by two driving 
vibration systems. vibration systems are driven simultaneously by inde- 
pendent controllers and amplifiers, and the welding tip 
vibration locus shape and direction may be controlled 
by regulating the vibration amplitudes and phase differ- 
ence of the two driving systems. 
The designed ultrasonic linear vibration bonding 
systems of 600 kHz are shown in Fig. 13. The vibration 
systems used piezoelectric-ceramic elements of 7.0 mm 
diameter, vibration systems of 6.5 mm diameter, and 3.5 
wavelengths of longitudinal vibration. The vibration 
frequency of 600 kHz used is ten times 60 kHz of the 
conventional bonding systems. 
The relationship between welding time and the weld 
strength of a 0.1 mm diameter aluminum wire specimen 
welded by 190 kHz linear and circular vibration, and 
120 kHz linear vibration welding tips, is shown in 
Fig. 14. Welding time is altered and shown up to 100 ms. 
The vibration velocity used is 0.45 m s-l (peak-to-zero 
value) at 190 kHz and 0.75 m s-l at 120 kHz, and the 
welding tip clamping force is 300 g. The required welding 
time of 190 kHz of linear locus is shorter than that of 
120 kHz. The required welding times by a circular and 
Fig. 13. Arrangement of a 600 kHz linear vibration ultrasonic wire 
bonding system. 
er aluminum 
nVib. velocity 0.45 m/s/l 
?T)/ib. velocity 0.75 m/d 
_,,,,’ -- --- 
1 0 o 4 n ‘Broken at’wire part 1 
0 20 40 60 80 100 
Welding time ( ms ) 
Fig. 14. Relationship between vibration velocity and the weld strength 
of aluminum wire 0.1 mm in diameter by 120 kHz linear, and 190 kHz 
linear and circular vibration welding systems, 
J. Tsujino er al. / Ultrasonics 34 ( 1996) I77-185 183 
80- 1.0 
C 
zl 5 
z40 zo.s a 
z .s 
% a 
3 20 -30.4 
Welding time f 100 ms ( A ; &ken at 
Clamping force : 300 g! 
O- ‘& Vib. yelo.{ Vib. amp. ) : 0.36 m/s ( 0.60 pm ) 
Oo 15 30 45 60 75 90 
Specimen wire direction ( degree ) 
Fig. 15. Relationship between specimen direction, output powers from 
two 90 kHz driving systems and welding strength, by a 90 kHz 
complex vibration wire bonding equipment with circular vibration 
locus. 
linear vibration welding tip for sufficient weld strength 
are about 20 ms and 40 ms at a frequency of 190 kHz. 
The required welding time of the circular locus is one- 
half that of the linear one. 
Output powers from the two-driving systems of com- 
plex bonding equipment are measured directly from the 
standing wave ratio measured using ring-type magnetic 
vibration velocity detectors, which were installed at the 
loop and near to the nodal vibration positions of the 
driving longitudinal vibration systems. Fig. 15 shows 
the relationships between the specimen direction, output 
powers from two 90 kHz driving systems and the welding 
strength by a 90 kHz complex vibration wire bonding 
equipment with circular vibration locus. It is shown that 
ouput power from one vibration system decreases as the 
specimen direction approaches a crossed angle, but the 
output power from the other system increases. The total 
output power from the two systems is almost constant, 
and uniform weld strengths are obtained by the welding 
system independent of the direction difference between 
the welding tip and specimen length. 
Using a low frequency of 60 kHz, sufficient joining is 
impossible in the case where the wire length direction 
to the welding tip vibration approaches 90”. Usually, 
the wire direction must be set parallel to the welding tip 
vibration to obtain sufficient welding results. Fig. 16 
shows the relationship between specimen direction and 
weld strength by linear vibration velocities of 0.94 m s ’ 
at 60 kHz and 0.30 m s-’ at 600 kHz. It is shown that 
the weld strength becomes independent of the direction 
using high vibration frequencies of 330 and 600 kHz. 
6. Ultrasonic plastic welding using high frequency and 
two vibration systems 
The ultrasonic plastic welding method is applicable 
for joining almost all thermoplastic materials, owing to 0 15 30 45 60 75 90 
Specimen wire direction ( degree ) 
Fig. 16. Relationship between specimen wire direction and weld 
strength of aluminum wire specimens 0.1 mm in diameter, welded by 
60 kHz and 600 kHz welding tips of linear vibration locus. 
its short welding time without adhesive, and it is widely 
used to join thermoplastic products that are difficult to 
join by microwave joining due to their low dielectric loss. 
The two-vibration-system welding was proposed by 
the author to improve the welding characteristics, and 
its effectiveness was shown in the cases of the same or 
different vibration frequencies of 20 kHz and 27 kHz. 
Welding characteristics are also improved by using a 
frequency higher than 15 to 40 kHz in conventional 
welding systems, because vibration absorption of plastics 
becomes a maximum in the range of 300 to 400 kHz in 
the case of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA). 
Using two vibration systems and driving the welding 
specimens from their upper and lower sides simul- 
taneously, the welding characteristics are also improved, 
resulting in smaller required vibration amplitude and 
less damage caused by vibration in the specimens com- 
pared with those of conventional systems. In the case of 
direct welding of thin plastic sheet specimens, it was 
shown that the required welding tip vibration velocity 
for bonding is determined by the sum of the upper and 
lower welding tip velocity. The required velocity for a 
90 kHz welding system is less than 30% that of a 27 kHz 
system. Using two vibration systems whose vibra- 
tion directions are crossed, welding characteristics are 
also significantly improved as in the case of parallel 
vibrations. 
Fig. 17 shows the arrangement of ultrasonic welding 
equipment using (a) two 90 kHz vibration systems in a 
parallel vibration direction and (b) 90 kHz longitudinal 
and 20 kHz torsional vibration systems whose vibration 
directions are crossed at a right angle. The 90 kHz 
ultrasonic vibration sources consist of a radial-to- 
longitudinal vibration direction converter with six bolt- 
clamped Langevin-type lead-zirconate-titanate (PZT) 
transducers installed in the converter at its radial 
184 J. Tsujino et al. / Ultrasonics 34 (1996) 177-185 
(4 (W 
Fig. 17. Arrangement of ultrasonic plastic welding equipment with 
two-vibration systems whose vibration directions are parallel or 
crossed at a right angle. (a) 90 kHz longitudinal vibration systems. 
(b) 90 kHz longitudinal and 20 kHz torsional vibration systems. 
vibration part, and a conical longitudinal vibration horn 
with a welding tip at its free end. The 90 kHz Langevin- 
type PZT transducer has 1.5 longitudinal vibration 
wavelength and consists of two piezoelectric ceramic 
disks of 5 mm thickness and 15 mm diameter, and two 
aluminum rods. It is attached to the vibration source by 
a clamping bolt. 
Direct welding conditions of lapped sheets using 
27 kHz and 90 kHz welding equipment is shown in 
Fig. 18. Critical welding conditions are determined by 
altering the vibration velocities of upper and lower 
welding tips. The required weld conditions are deter- 
mined as the sum of the upper and lower welding tips 
because the obtained curves are linear. The required 
welding tip total vibration velocity of 90 kHz is about 
30% that of 27 kHz equipment. Excessive static pressure 
and vibration velocity causes undesirable damage in the 
welding specimens. 
Fig. 19 shows the weld strength of 128 lapped 
polyethylene thin sheets obtained under various vibra- 
Upper vibration velocity (m/s) 
Fig. 18. Direct welding conditions of five lapped polyvinyl chloride 
sheets welded by 27 kHz and 90 kHz two-vibration-system plastic 
welding equipment. Welding time (s) 
Fig. 19. Direct welding conditions of 128 lapped polypropylene sheets 
of 0.025 mm thickness with (1) upper, (2) lower and (3) upper and 
lower 90 kHz longitudinal welding tips whose vibration directions are 
parallel to each other. 
tion conditions. In the case where upper and lower 
welding tips are driven simultaneously, the required 
welding time becomes significantly short compared with 
the case where only one welding tip is driven, and all 
lapped sheet specimens are welded successfully, but these 
specimens are partially welded in the case of one weld- 
ing tip. 
Fig. 20 shows direct welding conditions of lapped 
polypropylene sheets of 1.0 mm thickness with (1) lower, 
and (2) upper 90 kHz longitudinal and lower 20 kHz 
torsional welding tips, whose vibration directions are 
crossed at a right angle. Using only one vibration system, 
the weld strength obtained is rather small, but is large 
with two vibration systems. 
60 
50 
g 40 
$ 
c 30 
v) 
g 20 
10 
0 
Vibration velocity (m/s) 
Fig. 20. Direct welding conditions of lapped polypropylene sheets of 
1.0 mm thickness with (1) lower and (2) upper 90 kHz longitudinal 
and lower 20 kHz torsional welding tips whose vibration directions 
are crossed at a right angle. 
J. Tsujino et al. / Ultrasonics 34 (1996) 177-185 185 
7. Conclusions 
New ultrasonic welding methods of metal and plastic 
materials [l-3] have been proposed by the author and 
have shown their effectiveness. 
For welding of thick and large metal specimens, (1) the 
ultrasonic butt welding method of joining thick metal 
specimens end to end was proposed and was shown to 
be very effective for joining lapped welding specimens 
or butt welding specimens end to end. Aluminum plate 
specimens of 6 mm in thickness and 400 mm width were 
successfully welded by changing the welding tip driving 
positions. 
For welding of medium to large metal specimens, (2) a 
welding method using two vibration systems crossed at 
a right angle, which drives the welding specimens from 
their upper and lower sides simultaneously, was effective 
for successful welding. 
For medium-sized metal welding specimens, (3) com- 
plex vibration welding tips were shown to be very 
effective as bonding methods of thin wire specimens and 
thick and large specimens, and one-dimensional complex 
vibration systems were developed to simplify the systems 
and have been shown to be effective for successful 
welding. 
For welding of small metal specimens, such as ultra- 
sonic wire bonding of integrated circuits or electronic 
devices, (4) an ultrasonic wire bonding system using a 
vibration frequency higher than the 60 kHz used in 
conventional wire bonding systems, and using complex 
vibration welding tips vibrating in (a) elliptical to circular 
loci or (b) rectangular to square loci, was proposed and 
shown to be significantly effective. Bonding systems of 
complex vibration welding tips of 40 to 190 kHz and 
high frequency linear vibration welding tips of up to 
600 kHz have been designed. Using this equipment, the 
required vibration velocity becomes smaller and the 
required welding time shorter compared with conven- 
tional bonding systems. The frequency characteristics of 
the required vibration amplitude and vibration velocity 
were revealed from 40 to 600 kHz. 
For welding of plastic materials, (5) the high frequency 
and two-vibration-system welding method was effective. Two-vibration-system welding equipment of 90 kHz, 
with upper and lower vibration sources with six ultra- 
sonic transducers, was designed and it was shown that 
the required vibration velocity of 90 kHz was about l/3 
that of the 27 kHz welding system. The two-vibration- 
system welding method with different frequencies crossed 
at a right angle, using a 90 kHz upper longitudinal and 
a 20 kHz lower torsional vibration system was also 
effective. 
References 
Cl1 
PI 
c31 
c41 
[51 
C61 
c71 
C81 
c91 
Cl01 
Cl11 
Cl21 
Cl31 
Cl41 J. Tsujino, T. Ueoka and K. Kenmotsu, Proc. IEEE 1985 
Ultrasonics Symp. (IEEE, New York, 1986) 557. 
J. Tsujino, Proc. Ultrasonics International 1989 (Butterworths, 
Guildford, 1990) 346. 
J. Tsujino, T. Ueoka, I. Watanabe, Y. Kimura, T. Mori, 
K. Hasegawa, Y. Fujita, T. Shiraki and M. Motonaga, Proc. 
IEEE 1993 Ultrasonics Symp. (IEEE, New York, 1994) 405. 
J. Tsujino, T. Ueoka, Y. Susaki, K. Uchida, I. Watanabe and 
A. Andoh, Proc. IEEE 1990 Ultrasonics Symp. (IEEE, New 
York, 1991) 371. 
J. Tsujino, T. Ueoka, Y. Suzaki, K. Uchida, I. Watanabe and 
S. Andoh, Proc. 11th Symp. Ultrasonic Electronics, Kyoto, 1990; 
Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Suppl. 30-l (1991) 212. 
J. Tsujino, T. Ueoka, Y. Susaki, M. Ogawa, Y. Hirasawa and 
Y. Fujita, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 32 (Tokyo, 1993) 2441. 
J. Tsujino, T. Ueoka, I. Watanabe, M. Ogawa and M. Hirasawa, 
Proc. IEEE 1992 Ultrasonics Symp. (IEEE, New York, 1993) 859. 
J. Tsujino, Proc. Ultrasonics International 1979 (IPC Sci. & 
Tech. Press, Guildford, 1979) 628. 
J. Tsujino, Proc. IEEE 1987 Ultrasonics Symp. (IEEE, New 
York, 1988) 615. 
J. Tsujino, H. Sugimoto, M. Horikoshi, M. Sakai, H. Andoh 
and T. Negishi, Proc. 8th Symp. Ultrasonic Electronics, Tokyo, 
1987; Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Suppl. 27-l (1988) 186. 
J. Tsujino, Y. Murayama and H. Furuya, Proc. 10th Symp. 
Ultrasonics Electronics, Tokyo, 1989; Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Suppl. 
29-l (1990) 173. 
J. Tsujino, T. Mori, T. Onozato and K. Hasegawa, Jpn. J. Appl. 
Phys. 32 (Tokyo, 1993) 2435. 
J. Tsujino, T. Mori and K. Hasegawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 33 
(Tokyo, 1994) 3048. 
J. Tsujino, Y. Ishii, T. Shiraki, T. Tamura and T. Ueoka, IEEE 
1994 International Ultrasonics Symp. (IEEE, New York, 1995) 
1353. 
