Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B 1 I8 (1996) 596-601 
ELSEVIER Beam Interactions 
with Materials&Atoms 
Ion beam analysis of diamond-like carbon films 
J-P. Hirvonen a* * , J. Koskinen a, P. Torri b, R. Lappalainen b, A. Anttila b 
a VlT Manufacturing Technology, 02044 VrT. Finland 
b University of Helsinki, Department of Physics, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland 
Abstract 
Diamond-like carbon films are deposited with a number of different methods. This results in a wide variety of different 
microstructures and even compositions of the films, which challenges characterization capabilities. Ion beam analysis can be 
used in many ways to probe. the properties of the films. A classic application is the determination of hydrogen concentrations 
in hydrogenated amorphous carbon films, a-H:C. This is performed by using either a resonance of the nuclear reaction 
‘H(15N, ay)‘*C or a forward recoiling technique. Diamond-like films have been doped with metals, Si, F, etc. in order to 
modify mechanical, tribological, or optical properties. Dopand concentrations can be qualitatively measured using either a 
backscattering or nuclear reaction analysis (NRA) method. A fairly trivial application is the utilization of either Rutherford 
or non-Rutherford backscattering to obtain the number of carbon atoms per square centimetre. Combined with other 
information on the chemical composition of the film and with the thickness obtained with a profilometer, for example, the 
density of the very thin films can be calculated. The density is an interesting parameter of the films and may vary 
considerably, depending on the hydrogen concentration and the structure of chemical bonding. If the thickness of the films is 
not constant or if a diamond-like material is just a deposition with an irregular shape, the above method cannot be utilized. 
The ion beam technique may still be useful and the Doppler shift attenuation of the resonance can be used. Resonance 
techniques are useful in analysing some other carbon related films, for example in analysing nitrogen in CN, films. In this 
paper, the most useful ion beam techniques for analysing diamond-like materials are given with examples. 
1. Introduction 
Over the past 20 years several reports of self-lubricat- 
ing diamond-like carbon (DLC) films have been published. 
Amorphous DLC films can be divided into two different 
groups: hydrogen-free hard carbon films and hydrogenated 
carbon films (a-C: H). The a-C: H films are generally 
grown from hydrocarbon gas which is in the form of 
plasma or an ionized molecular beam. The hydrogen-free 
films are grown from carbon plasma or a carbon ion beam, 
generally created from a solid carbon source. In general, 
hydrogen-free DLC films are harder and possess more 
diamond-like qualities than a-C : H films [l]. This is mainly 
due to different film growth processes with a higher 
proportion of ionization and ion energy involved in the 
hydrogen-free film growth processes. However, present 
reports indicate that it is possible to grow dense a-C: H 
films with similar properties to those of hydrogen-free 
l Corresponding author. Address: Joint Research Centre. Insti- 
tute for Advanced Materials, P.O. Box 2, 1755 ZG Petten, The 
Netherlands. Tel. +31-2246 5251, fax +31-2266 1012. films if a sufficient ion energy and ionization rate are 
involved with the deposition process [2]. 
Analysing diamond-like films of different kinds is a 
challenging task. The determination of the atomic structure 
itself is probably the most challenging problem. Electron 
spectroscopies such as photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) 
and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) are widely 
used. Raman and IR spectroscopies are based on photon- 
phonon interactions. Especially Raman spectroscopy is 
used mostly to characterize crystalline diamond films, 
although amorphous structures are analysed as well. IR 
spectroscopy is suitable for probing hydrogenated amor- 
phous diamond-like films. 
There is also an obvious need to characterize the 
chemical composition of diamond-like films. Because dia- 
mond-like films are typically thin, with a thickness of less 
than a micrometre, ion beam analysis is suitable for almost 
all the chemical analysis required. In film thickness and 
hydrogen concentration measurements, ion beam analysis 
is evidently utilized most often. Trace impurities can be 
determined both qualitatively and quantitatively. Some- 
times the films are purposely alloyed and concentrations 
and the concentration profiles of alloying elements should 
naturally be confirmed experimentally. In fact, for all these 
0168-583X/96/$15.00 Copyright 6 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
SSDI 0168-583X(95)01 169-2 
J-P. Hiruonen et al. / Nuci. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Rex B I18 (19%) 596401 597 
measurements, fairly standardized ion beam analysis tech- 
niques can be exploited. 
2. Analysis of the main constituents carbon and hydro- 
gen 
The main constituents of diamond-like films are carbon 
and hydrogen. The concentration of carbon is seldom of 
primary interest. However, by measuring the concentration 
profile of carbon, the amount of carbon atoms/cm2 can be 
obtained by integration. This information can be utilized, 
for example, in the determination of the density. Backscat- 
tering spectrocopy (BS) is applied most frequently. The 
sensitivity of He+ backscattering for carbon at low ener- 
gies is not good. The signal-to-background ratio can be 
improved by using a light substrate such as silicon. Fig. la 
shows the backscattering spectrum taken with 2.4 MeV 
He+ from a diamond-like film deposited on silicon. At this 
He+ energy the backscattering cross section is non-Ruther- 
ford for carbon. The sensitivity is enhanced in the case of 
H+ backscattering, as illustrated in Fig. 1 b. The backscat- 
A- 
BACKSCATTERING 
2.4 MeV ‘He+ 
DLC on Si 
CJ 1.0 - Si 
z ._ 
h - 0.5 - 
Ta : 
0.0 : ’ ’ 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 
energy (keV) 
25x10 , 1 a ’ I ’ ’ ’ I ’ ’ ’ I ’ ’ ’ 
BACKSCATTERING 0: 
2.0 - C 
2.4 MeV ‘H’ 
DLC on Si 
7 .r( Si 
/ Ta 
energy (keV) 
Fig. 1. Backscattering spectrum of 2.4 MeV He+ (a) and H+ (b) 
from diamond-like film on silicon. I- 
(b 1 
1 5.. ... 
1% 
/ 
x25 
CHANNEL NUMBER 
Fig. 2. Backscattering spectrum of 2.4 MeV protons from self- 
supporting diamond-like film (a) and evaporated carbon films (b) 
[51. 
tering spectrum was taken from the same sample as that in 
Fig. la. Again the cross section for carbon is non-Ruther- 
ford. The carbon signal in Fig. 1 b is much narrower than 
in Fig. la due to the lower stopping power of carbon for 
H+ than for He+. Consequently, the depth resolution in 
the case of HC backscattering is worse than in the case of 
He+ backscattering. Non-Rutherford cross sections have 
been reported for a proton scattering of light elements 
r3,41. 
Backscattering spectra can also be taken from self-sup- 
porting diamond-like films obtained by dissolving a silicon 
substrate in an appropriate solution. The advantage of this 
technique is that light impurities can also be detected. Fig. 
2 shows backscattering spectra of 2.4 MeV H+ from a 
self-supporting diamond-like carbon film and an evapo- 
rated carbon film [5]. In this case a diamond-like carbon 
film was deposited by using a mass-separated carbon 
beam. The beam consisted of pure 12C. This can be 
verified from the spectra. In the case of the evaporated 
carbon film, the signal of the other stable carbon isotope 
r3C is also shown. The abundance of this isotope is, 1.1% 
in natural carbon. The ion beam deposited diamond-like 
carbon is very pure indeed. The only impurity observed 
was a small amount of absorbed oxygen on both sides of 
IX. NEW MATERIALS 
598 J-P. Hirvanen et al. / Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. 6 IIR (19%) 596-601 
the self-supporting film. As can be seen from Fig. 2, even 
a small nitrogen contamination can be detected as illus- 
trated in the backscattering spectra of the evaporated car- 
bon film. 
The number of high-energy ion beam facilities is in- 
creasing rapidly. Accordingly, high-energy (up to 10 MeV) 
backscattering measurements are becoming more and more 
popular. The advantage of high-energy backscattering is 
that the cross sections and detection sensivities are en- 
hanced. It has been estimated that at the energy of 3.55 
MeV, the cross section of He+ backscattering for carbon is 
about 6.5 times higher than that of the Rutherford cross 
section [6]. 
The most appropriate way to probe hydrogen is for- 
ward-recoil spectroscopy (FRES). In a typical setup, the 
sample is bombarded with a 2 to 3 MeV He+ beam at 75” 
and the forward-scattered protons are detected at 0 = 30”. 
Before this the backscattered He+ particles have been 
filtered out with an absorber in front of the detector. The 
sensitivity of this technique is below 1 at.% of H. The 
cross sections for hydrogen forward-scattering have been 
published recently by Baglin et al. [7]. These cross sections 
deviated from those of Rutherford already at quite low 
energies, i.e., above 1 MeV. FRES is a straightforward and 
rapid way to determine hydrogen concentrations. Another 
ion beam analysis technique is based on the utilization of 
the nuclear ‘H(“N, ay)‘*C reaction. This technique has a 
better depth resolution and higher sensitivity but is slower 
to accomplish in practice; especially because in a-H :C 
films the hydrogen concentrations are typically high. 
FRES is the recommended technique in analyzing hy- 
drogen in diamond-like films. The non-Rutherford 
backscattering from carbon and forward recoiling of hy- 
drogen can also be performed simultaneously. The advan- 
tage of this is the possibility to determine the appropriate 
beam parameters, if the film is on a substrate which still 
scatters He + according to the Rutherford cross section 
(substrates such as medium heavy and heavy metals). The 
backscattering and FRES spectra can be quantitatively 
analysed using conventional computer-aided techniques 
[8,91. 
3. Analysis of trace impurities 
Depending on the deposition conditions, diamond-like 
carbon films may also contain impurities. Typical impuri- 
ties are various filament materials which are most often 
heavy metals, and gaseous impurities, oxygen and nitro- 
gen. In hydrogen-free diamond-like carbon films, hydro- 
gen is also considered a contaminant. Heavy metals can be 
seen in backscattered spectra even though the substrate is 
not removed. This is particularly true in the case of a light 
substrate such as silicon. Backscattering energy is nor- 
mally high enough that signals from heavy impurities lie 
on a zero-background. In the case of light impurities, PIXE 
2.4 MeV II' 
DLC on Si 
I 
? 
10” 
5 10 15 20 25 
energy (keV) 
Fig. 3. PIXE spectrum induced by 2.4 MeV protons from the same 
sample as in Fig. 2. 
self-supporting samples can be used as shown in Fig. 2. 
This technique, however, requires quite complicated sam- 
ple preparations. Especially if oxygen or nitrogen is to be 
detected, deuterium induced ‘60(d,p)‘7C, ‘60(d,a)‘4N, 
“N(d,a)‘3C, and 14N(d,p)15N can be utilized [lO,ll]. 
Typically these reactions are used with a deuterium beam 
at the energy of about I MeV in order to reduce neutron 
production. By utilizing suitable computer codes, informa- 
tion about the depth distribution of oxygen can also be 
obtained. The depth resolution is reduced by an absorber 
normally used in front of a surface barrier detector in order 
to filter out backscattered deuteriums. If the sample in- 
volves both nitrogen and oxygen ‘60(d,p)‘7C, ‘60(d,cx)‘4N, 
and 14N(d,p)“N reactions may interfere and the precise 
determination of oxygen becomes difficult. Even in this 
case, nitrogen can be detected quantitatively because of the 
high Q value of the “N(d,a)‘3C reaction. 
Particle-induced X-ray emission (PIXE) is an altema- 
tive for the determination of heavy impurities. Fig. 3 
shows a PIXE spectrum taken from the same sample as the 
backscattering data in Fig. 1. This spectrum clearly indi- 
cated iron and tantalum contaminants. In the backscatter- 
ing spectra of Fig. I, only tantalum was observed without 
any indication of iron. 
Both in the case of deuterium-induced reactions and 
PIXE it is worth noting that, because the diamond-like 
carbon film is thin and the stopping power of carbon is 
quite low, it is sometimes difficult to distinguish the 
signals emanating from the surface film from those possi- 
bly coming from the substrate material. Again, if high-pur- 
ity substrate materials such as silicon are used, the possi- 
bility of mistakes is minimized. 
4. Analysis of alloying elements 
Diamond-like carbon films can be alloyed for a number 
of reasons, for example, to improve tribological or to 
J-P. Himmen et (11. /Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. 6 I I8 (1996) 596-601 599 
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 
Depth, nm 
Fig. 4. Nitrogen profile in CN, films as measured by the 429 keV 
resonance of the reaction “N(p, ay)‘*C. 
modify optical properties. Again, heavy metals can be 
detected by Rutherford backscattering. Light elements such 
as nitrogen, aluminum, and silicon can be detected with 
resonances of (p. y> or (p, or> reactions [12]. Aluminum 
has only one isotope, “Al, which has at least 22 narrow 
resonances below 1 MeV. But because the resonances are 
quite close to each other, a deep depth profiling is impossi- 
ble by using a y-ray detector with a poor energy resolu- 
tion, such as Na(I). The two strongest resonances are those 
at 632 and 992 keV. Decay of these resonances occurs 
with high-energy y-rays (10.4 and 10.8 MeV) which makes 
it quite easy to avoid some disturbing interferences of 
other possible impurities as discussed below. In the case of silicon, an appropriate resonance is that 
of the reaction 3”Si(p, yP’P at 620 keV which provides a 
high depth resolution. A suitable energy window for -y-ray 
detection is 7.0-8.3 MeV for Na(I) detector (the energy of 
the y peak is about 7.9 MeV). 
Nitrogen in carbon is of great interest at this time due 
to the metastable B-C,N, nitride with speculations of 
exciting mechanical properties. The best way to probe 
nitrogen at the concentration level involved is utilizing 
resonances of the “N(p, ay)“C reaction. There is only 
0.36% of “N in natural nitrogen, but because the reso- 
nances are very strong, depth profiling is easy and accu- 
rate. The most frequently used resonances are at 429 and 
898 keV. In most cases, the resonance at the lowest energy 
is recommended because there the background is also 
lower. The 429 keV resonance has a width r as narrow as 
0.10 keV. The energy of the photo peak is 4.43 MeV. 
Accordingly. the appropriate energy window for a Na(l) 
detector is 3. I to 4.8 MeV. The importance of the accuracy 
of the energy window is discussed later on. An example of 
the nitrogen distribution, as determined from a CN, film 
deposited using an arc discharge deposition, is shown in 
Fig. 4. 
5. Determination of the density of diamond-like carbon 
filnls 
A straightforward way to determine the density of 
diamond-like carbon films is to use appropriate ion beam 
analysis techniques to obtain the total number of atoms per 
square centimetre. By combining this data with thickness 
SToP IPEAK 
T FLIGHT PEAK 
~1.5 
I I I I 
1340 3380 
CHANNEL NUMBER 
Fig. 5. DSA measurement of the 2313 keV y-rays from the ‘3C(p, y)14N reaction using graphite (0). diamond (X) and diamond-like 
carbon (0) substrate. The inset shows the height ratio of the stop and flight peak as a function of density [ 141. 
IX. NEW MATERIALS 
600 J-P. Hiruonen et al. / Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B II8 (19%) 596-601 
measurements performed with a profilometer, the density 
in atoms per cubic centimetre can be calculated. This, 
together with chemical information, also yields the density 
in units of g/cm3. 
If the depositions are of an irregular shape or if the 
thickness of the film is not uniform, a novel ion beam 
analysis technique can be applied. This technique is a 
complicated one, requires special expertise, and is based 
on very accurate measurements of the shape of a y peak. 
The method is called the Doppler shift attenuation (DSA) 
method. Conventionally DSA measurements are used to 
determine short nuclear lifetimes (10-“-10-‘5 s). How- 
ever, if the lifetime is known, the method can be used for 
microdensity measurements [13]. The main principles of 
the DSA method are as follows. When nuclear reactions 
are generated with a particle beam, the recoiling nuclei 
travel in a fixed direction and stop gradually in the sub- 
strate material. If the lifetime of the excited state is such 
that the recoiling nuclei emit y-rays during the slowing- 
down process, the recoiling nuclei have different velocities 
at the moment of emission. Accordingly, because of the 
Doppler effect the corresponding y-rays emitted are of 
different energies. The rate of slowing of the recoiling 
nuclei is proportional to the density of the substrate mate- 
rial. This in turn means that the measured profile of the y 
peak depends on the density of the substrate. 
Carbon isotope 13C has a suitable (p, y) resonance at 
the proton energy level of 1150 keV which strongly popu- 
lates the 2313 and 6204 keV states of 14N with the 
lifetimes of 102 and 187 fs [ 141. This means in practice 
that in DSA measurements performed at an angle of 0” the 
peaks of the de-exciting -y-rays are seen as a combination 
of two components: a low-energy peak due to the fully 
stopped recoils and a high-energy peak due to the recoils 
in flight. This is, of course, possible only if a y-ray 
detector with a very accurate energy resolution is used. 
Fig. 5 shows the DSA measurements of the 2313 keV 
y-rays from the 13C(p, y)14N reaction using graphite, 
natural diamond, and ion beam deposited hydrogen-free 
diamond-like carbon film as a substrate (for details see 
Ref. [13]). It is evident that both the natural diamond and 
diamond-like carbon film have an identical DSA peak 
profile which, on the other hand, deviates greatly from that 
of graphite. In the inset are given the height ratios of the 
stop and flight peaks as a function of density obtained by 
Monte Carlo calculations of the slowing down of recoiling 
nuclei. The density of the diamond-like carbon films agreed 
within 7% with that of diamond (3.52 g/cm3). The density 
of the same films as determined by using a conventional 
method is about 3.2-3.5 g/cm3. 
6. Discussion and conclusions 
Diamond-like carbon films are a very suitable object 
for ion beam analysis. Both the main constituents and impurities, as well as concentration distributions of alloy- 
ing elements, can be determined by a wide variety of 
different backscattering, forward recoiling, and nuclear 
reaction methods. Moreover, all the beneficial features of 
ion beam analysis can be exploited in a straightforward 
manner: the speed of the measurements, accuracy, and 
reproducibility. Above all, however, as a highly quantita- 
tive method, ion beam analysis promotes development in 
this fast-emerging area of research by providing exact 
chemical characterization of the materials under investiga- 
tion. 
Backscattering measurements are also the most straight- 
forward in the case of diamond-like carbon films. It is 
worth mentioning a few words of caution in the case of 
nuclear reaction analysis. Sometimes samples contain un- 
known contaminants which may result in disturbing and 
interfering reactions with a y-ray emission. The most 
serious contaminant is fluorine which has several strong 
(p, oy) resonances, for example at 340,484, and 878 keV. 
In many deposition systems which are used in depositing 
different types of coatings, fluorine contamination is possi- 
ble. The fluorine resonances mainly decay with a 6129 
keV y-ray. In the case of aluminium profiling, the energy 
window should be above this energy. In the case of 
nitrogen profiling, the energy window is more difficult to 
set. Since fluoride background includes the same y-rays 
over a wide bombarding energy range, the ratio of y-ray 
yield of fluorine in the energy range 5.0-6.2 MeV and 
3.1-4.8 MeV (the recommended energy window) remains 
a constant. By using the additional energy window 5.0-6.2 
MeV, the fluorine interference changing as a function of 
bombarding energy can be subtracted. 
In summary, we may conclude that although ion beam 
analysis can be utilized in many ways in analysing dia- 
mond-like carbon films, there are in most cases no special 
features as compared to ion beam analysis of any other 
material. In backscattering analysis, the energy of the 
bombarding beam almost always falls outside the regime 
where the Rutherford scattering cross section is valid. This 
makes it necessary to use either experimentally obtained 
cross sections or a standard sample. Moreover, adequate 
attention should be paid on the possibility of a fluorine 
contaminant when using nuclear reaction analysis with a 
y-ray emission. 
References 
[I] J.-P. Hirvonen, J. Koskinen, R. Lappalainen and A. Anttila, 
Mater. Sci. Forum 52/53 (1990). Properties and preparation 
of amorphous carbon films, eds. J. Poutch and S.A. AI- 
terovitz (Trans. Tech. Publications, Aedermannsdorf, 
Switzerland, 1989) p. 197. 
[2] M. Weiler, S. Sattel, K. Jung and H. Ehrhardt, Diamond and 
Related Materials 3 (1994) 608. 
[3] E. Rauhala, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 12 (1985) 447. 
J-P. Hirvonen et al./ Nucl. Instr. und Meth. in Phys. Rex B II8 (19%) 596-601 601 
[4] M. Luomaj’arvi, E. Rauhala and M. Hautala, Nucl. Instr. and 
Meth. B 9 (1985) 255. 
[5] A. Anttila, J. Koskinen, R. Lappalainen, J-P. Hirvonen, D. 
Stone and C. Paszkiet, Appl. Phys. Lea. 50 (1987) 132. 
[6] J.R. Tesmer and M. Nastasi, (eds.) Handbook of Modem Ion 
Beam Analysis (MRS, Pittsburgh, PA, 1995); see also R.W. 
Hill, Phys. Rev. 90 (1953) 845. 
[7] J.E.E. Baglin, A.J. Kellock, M.A. Crockett and A.H. Shih, 
Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 64 (1992) 469. 
(81 L.R. Doolittle, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 9 (1985) 334. 
[9] J. Saarilahti and E. Rauhala, Nucl. lnstr. and Meth. B 64 
( 1992) 734. [lo] G. Amsel, J.P. Nadai, E. D’ Artemare, D. David, E. Guard 
and J. Moulin, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 92 (1971) 481. 
[I I] L.C. Felfman and S.T. Picraux, in Ion Beam Handbook for 
Material Analysis, eds. J.W. Mayer and E. Rimini (Academic 
Press, New York, 1977) p. 118. 
[I21 J-P. Hirvonen and R. Lappalainen, in Handbook of Modem 
Ion Beam Analysis, eds. J.R. Tesmer and M. Nastasi (MRS, 
Pittsburgh, PA. 1995) p. 167. 
[I31 A. Anttila. 1. Koskinen, M. Bister and J-P. Hirvonen. Thin 
Solid Films I36 (1986) 136. 
[14] W.M. Currie. Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 73 (1969) 173. 
IX. NEW MATERIALS 
