cm __ Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B 118 ( 1996) 7 18-723 
__ 
El!! 
ELSEVIER ILiYlOk4l B 
Beam Interactions 
with Materials B Atoms 
Channeled ion assisted epitaxial growth of Ge on thin Si substrates 
Kazuo Saitoh * , Hiroaki Niwa, Setsuo Nakao, Yoshiko Miyagawa, Soji Miyagawa 
National Industrial Research Institute ofNagoya Hirate-cho, Kim-ku. Nagoya 462, Japan 
Abstract 
Germanium films were vapour-deposited on thin self-supporting Si substrates of about 1 p,rn in thickness. During 
deposition, the substrates were irradiated on the backsurface by a C+ beam with energies between 0.6 and 1.8 MeV in a 
(100) channeling condition. The substrate was heated up to about 400°C only by the beam of intensity lower than 2 
PA/cm’. Both backward and forward scattering spectrometries combined with the channeling technique were used as a 
monitor for alignment of the substrate to the (100) axial channeling condition and characterization of epitaxial Ge films. 
Heteroepitaxial growth of Ge films was observed for substrate temperature of about 350°C and incident energies of 0.6- 1.8 
MeV. The results showed that the energy of the assist beam remarkably affects the crystalline quality of Ge film and Si 
substrate, as well as the morphology of grown Ge. 
1. Introduction 
Due to its specific irradiation effect, ion ,beams have 
been used frequently in advanced film processing. Ion 
assisted coating and ion beam induced epitaxial crystalliza- 
tion (IBIEC) are the typical examples. These use phenom- 
ena induced by ion impact, such as excitation of surface 
atoms, creation of defects and their migration. In addition, 
ion beam irradiation in a channeling condition shows a 
specific feature of ion beam effects in single crystals. In 
our previous studies [1,2], we have shown that ion irradia- 
tion in a channeling condition at elevated temperature 
provides effective recovery of damaged single crystals. 
This is due to the fact that channeled ions interact prefer- 
entially with defect atoms. Our next interest is to study 
epitaxial growth which is assisted by channeled ions. 
In this experiment, however, normal geometry of ion 
assisted deposition cannot be used because at the incident 
surface, which is the film growth frontier, incident ions do 
not attain the channeled state. Instead, assisted ions should 
attack the growth frontier from inside the substrate, i.e. 
transmission geometry is necessary. 
In a previous paper, we reported fabrication process of 
self-supporting thin silicon films of km thickness [3]. 
Films fabricated by this method have excellent uniformity 
in thickness, flatness and crystallinity, which can be used 
for ion channeling experiment in transmission geometry 
such as the characterization of epitaxial films [4]. In the 
present study, we have tried to use the self-supporting Si 
film as a substrate for heteroepitaxial growth of Ge. The 
l Corresponding author. substrate of Si film is irradiated with an MeV ion beam 
from the backsurface in a channeling condition. In addi- 
tion, this experimental geometry makes it possible to use 
the in situ monitor of grown film and substrate with the 
conventional channeling technique. 
2. Experimental 
Self-supporting thin Si films of 0.8-l f,r.rn in thickness 
were used in this study. They were prepared by B ion 
implantation and successive selective etching techniques; 
details of the fabrication procedure were described in the 
previous paper [3]. The shape of the sample is shown in 
Fig. 1. The etched surface of the sample, on which Ge was 
deposited, was finally prepared by an Ar beam etching of 
about 200 eV to remove the B doped layer and to adjust 
the film thickness. 
Deposition of Ge with assist beam irradiation and the in 
situ observation were performed in a vacuum chamber 
connected with the NIRIN (National Industrial Research 
Institute of Nagoya) tandem-type ion accelerator. The ex- 
perimental setup is shown in Fig. 2. A C+ beam was used 
as an assist beam. The energy of the beam was between 
0.6 to 1.8 MeV and the beam intensity was less than 2 
PA/cm*. The assist beam was collimated to 8 mm in 
diameter by the fixed slit, and finally a part of the beam 
was irradiated to the film through a hole of graphite 
aperture (4 mm in diam.) in front of the sample. Ge vapour 
from a Kunudsen cell (K-cell) was deposited on the back- 
surface of the ion-irradiating Si film. The deposition rate 
was about 8 nm/min. 
For the in situ monitor before and after Ge deposition, a 
He*+ beam of 2.7 MeV was used as a probe beam. Two 
0168-583X/96/$15.00 Copyright 0 19% Elsevier Science B.V. AI1 rights reserved 
SSDI 0168-583X(95)01 109-9 
K. Saitoh et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 118 (1996) 718-723 719 
Deposit face Incident face 
0 T 
-1omm 
--L -A- \ I I -0.4 mm 
thin single crystal -1 pm 
Fig. 1. Shape of the self-supporting thin Si substrate used in this 
study. 
types of monitor were used: One was the conventional 
RBS-channeling (RBS-Cl method detected at 170” from 
the beam direction, and the other was forward scattering 
(FS) method detected at 45” from the beam direction. Due 
to the large scattering cross section, the latter method can 
be used for a low dose monitoring of samples which are 
sensitive to the ion irradiation. 
The experiments were performed by the following four 
steps: In the first step, a thin Si substrate. set in the sample 
holder was aligned to the (100) axial channeling direction 
with respect to the incident beam, using the FS-channeling 
Faraday Cup technique. Secondly, an assist beam was irradiated to the 
substrate for 10 min. During this step, the temperature of 
the sample was measured with a spot thermometer 
(MINORTA IR-3081, as shown in Fig. 2. The beam inten- 
sity was adjusted by a raster scanner so that the measured 
temperature was an appropriate value. The assist beam 
irradiation was continued to the next step. In the next step, 
Ge vapour was deposited on the backsurface of the irradi- 
ated substrate from the K-cell for 10 min. In the final step, 
RBS-C spectra, i.e. both random and aligned spectra with 
respect to the (100) axis, were measured by the 2.7 MeV 
He*+ beam. 
3. Results and discussion 
In this experiment, the flatness and crystalline quality 
of the substrate film are quite important. Fig. 3 shows 
results of RBS and FS channeling measurements. The 
(100) aligned RBS spectrum is much lower than the 
random one; the minimum yield is lower than 0.1 even at 
the backsurface of the film. This shows that the crystalline 
quality of the substrate is good for the present experiments. 
A similar result is obtained by the FS measurement, where 
the minimum of about 0.07 agree well with the integrated 
value of the RBS result. 
One advantage of the FS measurement is that of the 
I Reoovable Mirror /' / 
\ /' Sample Holder on Coniometer 
\ 
b ;;/I;' 
/' \\ 
/ / '\ 
0 (3 and netector (RBS) 
Spot Thermometer 
Detector (Fs) 
Fig. 2. Experimental setup of the beam irradiation, Ge deposition and in situ monitor system. 
X. SYNTHESIS/PROCESSING 
K. Saitoh et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 118 (1996) 718-723 
a) RBS 2.7 MeV He" - Si<lOW 
Si 
1 
,Randon 
_ ,_ ul;*li; 
lb) FS(45* ) 2.7 h!eV He" - Si<loo> 
FC Si 
cy I - He++ 
,:’ “li 
Q’,’ 
D 
Random 
\ 
50 i <lOO> Aligned 
+A 
100 150 200 
CHANNEL NUMBER 
Fig. 3. Random and (100) aligned spectra of (a) backscattered 
and (b) forward scattered ions from a thin Si substrate before 
deposition. Solid tine in the RBS spectrum is a result of simula- 
tion of random spectrum for Si of 0.93 pm thickness. 
low dose monitor. In the case of FS measurement, both the 
narrow beam (1 mm) and the wide beam (4 mm) can be 
used. Although, Fig. 3a is the result using the narrow 
beam, we obtained almost the same result by using the 
wide beam. This shows that the flatness of the substrate is 
excellent over the ion irradiated area. We use the FS 
measurement with the wide beam for the initial alignment 
of the substrate before deposition. It should be noted that, 
if we employ the RBS measurement for the alignment, the 
local fluence of probe beam irradiation is more than 100 
times that of the FS measurement with the wide beam. 
As far as the epitaxial growth is concerned, substrate 
temperature during deposition is quite important. Fig. 4 
shows the dependence of temperature on beam intensity, in 
the case of the 1.8 MeV C+ beam irradiation to the 1.3 
km thick Si substrate at (100) channeling condition. It is 
shown that the substrate is easily heated up to about 400°C 
only by the assist beam irradiation and is well controlled 
by the beam intensity. 
However, we have two problems concerning the beam 
heating and the monitor. One is that this measurement is 
only for the initial stage of the beam irradiation without 
the Ge deposition. During the Ge deposition, the sample is heated further by irradiation from the K-cell and by the 
increase in the energy deposition to Ge film deposited. 
Furthermore, since the initial irradiation is in the channel- 
ing condition, energy deposition increases significantly 
with the increase in irradiation damage. Unfortunately, the 
temperature during deposition cannot be measured because 
IR irradiation from the sample contains the reflection light 
from the K-cell crucible which is at a much higher temper- 
ature than the substrate. 
The second problem concerns the calibration of mea- 
sured temperature. The heating area to be measured is too 
small to be accessible for our spot thermometer. In addi- 
tion, the transparency of IR through vacuum window and 
reflectance of the mirror may be sensitive to the measure- 
ment. Although some calibration procedure for absolute 
temperature determination is required, we have never per- 
formed this. Therefore, the measured temperature should 
be noted as an index, and in the experiments described 
below, we kept only the initially measured temperature to 
the same value, 35O”C, by adjusting the beam intensity and 
the intensity was maintained throughout the process. The 
beam intensities were between 2 and 3 uA/cm’, depend- 
ing on assist energy and substrate thickness. 
In preliminary tests of this method, we tried many 
assist conditions and found that Ge deposition assisted by 
Si Sample 
Spot Thernometer 
501 
BEAM HEATING by 1.8 MeV C+ 
0 1.3 pm Si / 
u 401 / 
z 
z 
2 
g 301 
I / 
w 
+ 
2oc 
0 1.0 2.0 3.0 
BEAM INTENSITY (pA/cm*) 
Fig. 4. Dependence of substrate temperature on tbe beam intensity 
of 1.8 MeV C+, measured by a spot thermometer. 
K. Saitoh et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 118 (1996) 718-723 721 
(100) aligned beam at temperatures higher than 300°C 
revealed epitaxial growth. Here, we report the cases of Ge 
deposition assisted by C+ beams of 0.6-1.8 MeV in the 
(100) channeling condition. In Fig. 5, results of in situ 
RBS-C measurements after Ge deposition assisted by C+ 
beams of 0.6, 1.0, 1.2 and 1.8 MeV are shown together. 
Solid lines in the figure are the results of simulation for the 
random spectra of backscattered He ions from uniform 
layers of the Si substrate and the deposited Ge, using the 
RUMP code [6]. In the case of 0.6 MeV assist, the aligned 
spectrum for the Si substrate is considerably higher than 
before deposition, suggesting that the substrate is damaged 
by the assist beam irradiation. Whereas the aligned spec- 
trum for Ge is apparently lower than the random one 
showing that epitaxial growth occurred. The substrate 
damage decreases significantly in the case of the 1.0 MeV 
assist. The aligned spectrum for Ge shows that epitaxial 
growth also occurs better than the 0.6 MeV assist. In this 
case, we find a pronounced wider peak of Ge than that 
predicted with the simulation, in which uniform layer of 
Ge is assumed. This suggests that the grown film has a 
rough surface like an island structure. 
In the cases of 1.2 and 1.8 MeV assist, the pronounced 
damage in the Si substrate decreases almost completely. 
This is due to the decrease in nuclear energy deposition 
which creates the irradiation damage. This is correspond- 
ing well to the fact described in the previous paper [l], i.e. 
the channeled ion irradiation at an elevated temperature 
provides effective annealing of the irradiation damage. 
Under the condition that damage levels of the Si sub- strates are the same order, the crystalline quality of epitax- 
ial Ge films can be compared by the in situ RBS-C 
measurement. The minimum yield for the Ge film assisted 
by 1.2 MeV beam is about 0.2, whereas it increases to 
about 0.7 for that assisted by 1.8 MeV. It is apparent that 
the epitaxial growth is strongly influenced by the assist 
energy as well as the substrate temperature. This suggests 
that the ratio of the nuclear energy deposition to the 
electronic one in Ge films is important. Roughly speaking, 
the nuclear energy deposition rate of assist ions in Si and 
Ge films decreases monotonically as the energy increases 
in this energy region. It may influence not only the damage 
creation in the Si substrate but also migration and nucle- 
ation of deposited Ge atoms on the Si surface. Although 
much nuclear energy deposition produces radiation dam- 
age in the Si substrate (in the cases of the 0.6 and 1 .O MeV 
assists), crystalline quality of the grown Ge film deterio- 
rates as the nuclear deposition rate decreases. 
It is interesting to compare the ratio of the nuclear 
energy deposition to the electronic one in the grown Ge 
films in the cases of 1.2 and 1.8 MeV assists. If we use the 
random stopping power for the penetration of assist ions 
through the substrates, the energies at the Si/Ge interface 
are calculated to be 0.3 and 0.75 MeV for the 1.2 and 1.8 
MeV assists, respectively. On the other hand, if we assume 
that the stopping power for channeling ions is one half of 
the random one on the basis of the equipartition rule (71, 
the energies at the Si/Ge interface are 0.75 and 1.3 MeV 
for 1.2 and 1.8 MeV assists. Therefore, the assist energy 
may range 0.3-0.75 MeV for the 1.2 MeV assist, whereas 
(a) 0.6 MeV C+ assist E 
'Iwl 
-Randun , cc 
v) IYX) .<lOO> aligned ')( / 
I- Si I z 1 . = lcm 0 
u 
ml 
mm 
(c) 1.2 MeV C+ assist 1 
zoo0 I . 
CHANNEL NUMBER (bJl.0 YeV Cf assist 
i 
(d) 1.8 MeV C+ assist 1 
J--J/j; 5” 100 15” 
CHANNEL NUMBER 
Fig. 5. Results of in situ RBS-C measurements for Ge deposited samples assisted by C+ beam of (a) 0.6 MeV, (b) 1 .O MeV, (c) 1.2 MeV 
and (d) 1.8 MeV. 
X. SYNTHESIS/PROCESSING 
722 K. Saitoh et al./Nucl. Ins@. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 118 (1996) 718-723 
0.75-1.3 MeV for the 1.8 MeV assist. This leads that the 
ratio of the nuclear energy deposition to the electronic one 
for the 1.2 MeV assist is more than twice of that for the 
1.8 MeV assist. Although these estimations are quite rough, 
difference in crystalline quality of the epitaxial Ge films 
may relate to the difference in the nuclear energy deposi- 
tion rate. 
The in situ RBS measurement, however, cannot provide 
accurate characterization of epitaxial Ge films, because at 
the Ge/SI”intet-face the dechanneled fraction of the inci- 
dent beam increases even if we use a perfect crystal as the 
substrate. In addition, the dechanneled fraction signifi- 
cantly increases at the interface due to the misfit between 
Ge and Si lattices. For the accurate characterization, one of 
the samples was measured by RBS-C from the Ge de- 
posited surface. The result is shown in Fig. 6. The mini- 
mum yield is about 0.11, which is about one half of that 
measured by the in situ geometry, i.e. the measurement 
from the Si substrate surface. 
It is interesting to observe the morphology of the 
epitaxial Ge surface because it is quite important for the 
device application. In Fig. 7 SEM photographs of epitaxial 
Ge surfaces assisted by 0.6, 1 .O, 1,2 and 1.8 MeV C+ 
beams are shown together [5]. Corresponding to the RBS-C 
results, the morphology of deposited Ge was strongly 
affected with the assist beam energy. In the case of 0.6 2m 
RBS (2.7 YeV He’) 2000 
FC S i/b * 
2 I3-0 c-l-7 He” 
L 7 x 
0 
” Iwo 
3 100 150 200 
CHANNEL NUMBER 
Fig. 6. A result of RBS-C measurement for the Ge deposited 
sample assisted by the C+ beam of 1.2 MeV. The He’+ beam 
was incident from the Ge deposited surface. 
MeV assist, deposited Ge shows quite a complicated struc- 
ture, suggesting that the activity of migration of deposited 
Ge atoms is so high that these form a porous structure. In 
the case of 1.0 MeV assist, epitaxial Ge shows a typical 
island structure. This is corresponding well to the in situ 
RBS-C measurement shown in Fig. 5b, where the consid- 
(a) 0.6 MeV C+ assist (bj1.0 MeV C+ assist 
(cl 1.2 MeV C+ assist (d) 1.8 MeV C+ assist 
Fig. 7. SEM photographs of deposited Ge assisted by C+ beam of (a) 0.6 MeV, (b) 1.0 MeV, (c) 1.2 MeV and (d) 1.8 MeV. 
K. Saitoh et al./Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Rex B 118 (1996) 718-723 723 
erably wide peak of Ge was observed. Each crystallite 
shows clearly the pattern of the crystalline plane and they 
seem to be of the same orientation. Such an island struc- 
ture drastically changes for the cases of 1.2 MeV and 1.8 
MeV assists suggesting that the activity of migration de- 
creases; the Ge growth occurs over the Si surface, although 
the film consists of submicron-order crystallites. Thus the 
surface morphology of epitaxial Ge film is sensitive to the 
energy of assist beam, as well as the crystalline quality of 
the epitaxial Ge film. 
4. Summary 
As a new technique of epitaxial growth, we have tried 
the channeled ion assisted epitaxial growth of Ge on 
self-supporting thin Si substrates. Both the RBS and FS 
measurements combined with the channeling technique are 
quite useful for the in situ monitor of the epitaxial Ge film 
and the Si substrate and for the alignment for the channel- 
ing condition. The crystalline quality of the epitaxial Ge 
film and the Si substrate was significantly affected by the 
assist energy, as well as the surface morphology of the 
epitaxial film. In conclusion, channeled beam assisted epitaxial growth 
proposed in this study is an attractive new method. Al- 
though there are many problems to be solved, it provides a 
possibility of creating new epitaxial films which cannot be 
obtained with other techniques. 
References 
[l] K. Saitoh, S. Nakao, H. Niwa, M. Ikeyama, Y. Miyagawa and 
S. Miyagawa. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 31 (1992) 4020. 
[2] S. Nakao. K. Saitoh, M. Ikeyama, H. Niwa. S. Tanemura, Y. 
Miyagawa and S. Miyagawa, Jpn. J. Appi. Phys. 33 (1994) 
4100. 
[3] K. Saitoh, H. Niwa, S. Nakao and S. Miyagawa, in: Ion 
Implantation Technology-94, eds. S. Coffa, G. Ferla, F. Pri- 
010, E. Rimini (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1995) p. 998. 
[4] P.F. Lyman, S. Thevuthasan and L.E. Seiberling, J. Cryst. 
Growth 113 (1991) 45. 
[5] W.J. Verhue, J.M. Carulli, J.A. Miller and G.G. Peterson, J. 
Vat. Sci. Technol. B 9 (1991) 2022. 
[6] L. Doolittle, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 9 (1985) 344; B 15 
(1986) 227. 
[7] J. Lindhard, K. Dan. Vidensk. Selsk., Mat. Phys. Medd. 34 
(1965) 1. 
X. SYNTHESIS/PROCESSING 
