Vacuum/volume 47Inumbers 6-6lpages 653 to 65511996 
Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All riahts reserved Pergamon 
PII: SOO42-207X(96)00039-5 0042-207X/56 $15.00+.00 
Wall conditioning in ITER 
H Nakamura, J Dietz and P Ladd, lTER Garching JWS, c/o Max-Planck-Institute fuer Plasmaphysik, 
Boltzmannstrasse 2,85748 Garching bei Muenchen, Germany 
This article presents plans for wall conditioning for ITER. Typical machine parameters are 7.5 GW of fusion 
power and 7000 s of DT burn duration. To achieve these plasma, the wall conditioning is required in ITER. 
For baseline methods, glow discharge cleaning for zero-magnetic field, and electron cyclotron resonance 
discharge cleaning and divertor active pumping for high-magnetic fields are considered. Alternative methods 
are also considered. Copyright 0 7996 Elsevier Science Ltd. 
Key words: Electron cyclotron resonance discharge cleaning, glow discharge cleaning, ITER, recycling control, 
wall conditioning. 
Introduction 
The purpose of wall conditioning is impurity removal and recyc- 
ling control of hydrogenic gas during plasma start-up. In 
addition. minimisation of tritium inventory of in-vessel com- 
ponents becomes important as shown in recent plasma experi- 
ments with deuterium and/or tritium gases.‘,’ In present plasma 
confinement devices, wall conditioning plays an important role 
in realising good plasma confinement characteristics.3.4.5 In these 
devices, Glow Discharge Cleaning (GDC),6 Electron Cyclotron 
Resonance Discharge Cleaning (ECRDC),7 Taylor Type Dis- 
charge Cleaning (TDC),8 Disruptive Discharge Cleaning (DDC),4 
tokamak shot discharge cleaning and thin film coating such as 
carbonisation.’ boronization’O and siliconization” are used. 
In ITER. after start-up of the super conducting coils, a steady 
state toroidal magnetic field is present. There exists no established 
method for periodically conditioning surfaces at high field to 
reduce the near-surface hydrogenic inventory for low recycling 
during and after plasma operation. Therefore, wall conditioning 
procedures have to be considered both for zero-magnetic field 
wall conditioning and for high magnetic field wall conditioning 
for periodic between-shot wall conditioning. 
ITER machine 
The ITER machine aim is to demonstrate controlled ignition, at 
a nominal fusion power of 1.5 GWwith a D-T fuel mixture 
providing an inductive pulse flat-top capability of about 1000 s 
with steady-state as an ultimate goal.” The basic device par- 
ameters are: major radius of 8.14 m, minor radius of 2.8 m. 
plasma current of 21 MA. and toroidal magnetic field of 5.68 
T at the major radius. The plasma has a single-null divertor 
configuration with the null located at the bottom. Inside of the 
vacuum vessel made of stainless steel 316LN, divertor cassettes and shield blankets are installed. First wall material on the shield 
blanket is Be. For the plasma facing components of the divertor 
cassettes, candidate materials are Be, Carbon fiber composite 
(CFC) and W. Material selection will be based on material R & 
D and design. To evacuate the vacuum vessel, 16 cryopumps are 
located inside divertor pumping ports. During the burn phase, 
some cryopumps will be in operation mode and other pumps will 
be in regeneration mode. During the regeneration. about 90% of 
regenerated fuel gases (H,D,T) will be directly fuelled again to 
the plasmas. This recirculation operation mitigates the tritium 
inventory. The fuelling system consists of gas injection and pellet 
injection.” The gas puffing system will deliver hydrogenic 
(H/D/T) and other gases (for divertor radiation enhancement 
and wall conditioning) at two poloidal elevations: top of the 
plasma center and at the divertor. 
Requirements for wall conditioning in ITER 
Wall conditioning will be done within the capability of the 1TER 
pumping system. Wall conditioning gases are HZ, DL, He and 
reactive gases. For wall conditioning. pumping speed to keep 
impurity residence times in the torus 5 10 s is required in order to 
minimise impurity re-implantation by the discharge. Maximum 
operation for each cleaning cycle is required to be 100 h. The 
requirements for wall conditioning relate to vacuum. plasma 
operation and tritium inventory issues. 
Vacuum. The base vacuum pressure is IO 5 Pa or less for hydro- 
gen isotopes and lo-’ Pa or less for impurity gases after bake- 
out and conditioning. The bakeout temperature of in-vessel com- 
ponents is required to be at least 200 C. If graphite plasma 
facing components are used widely. baking higher than 200 ‘C is 
653 
H Nakamura et al: Wall conditioning in ITER 
required for effective outgassing. Total pumping speed by pri- 
mary cryopumps will be about 200 m3 SK’. Projected surface area 
of components exposed to vacuum inside the vacuum vessel is 
about 7200 m2. Based on these values, the total outgassing rate 
should be less than 4.2x lo-’ Pam3s~‘m~‘. In previous toka- 
maks, e.g. JT-60, JET, TFTR and DIII-D, the total outgassing 
rate is in a range between 4.3 x IO-’ to 3 x IO-’ Pam’s’mm*. So, 
the required outgassing rate of ITER is a value for which there 
is some design experience. 
Plasma operation. For plasma operation, wall conditioning is 
required for impurity removal, recycling control of hydrogenic 
gas during plasma start-up, and flat-top discharge. For this 
purpose, GDC, ECRDC, TDC, DDC, tokamak shot, and thin 
film coating (e.g. Li,Be,B,C,Si) are used in present tokamak 
experiments. Recent experiments show that low recycling con- 
ditions with particle replacement time of a few seconds are necess- 
ary to realise good plasma confinement.’ Based on these results, 
low recycling conditions will also be required in ITER to obtain 
good plasma confinement. In ITER, after start-up of the super- 
conducting coils, a steady state magnetic field is produced. 
Change of the toroidal magnetic field from 5.7 T to zero needs 
about 2 h. This change would induce mechanical stress in the 
superconducting coils. Therefore, development of a wall con- 
ditioning method at high magnetic field is required, especially, 
for between-shot wall conditioning. For wall conditioning (except 
for thin film coating), helium gas is preferred because wall con- 
ditioning by deuterium gas increases deuterium outgassing from 
the wail during the plasma start-up phase. Recently, reduction 
of wall particle inventory by active divertor pumping has been 
reported in DIII-D.14 This effect may mitigate requirements for 
the wall conditioning method. 
Tritium inventory. During plasma operation, a part of the tritium 
fuel is implanted and retained in plasma facing components. 
According to experimental results in present tokamak machines, 
co-deposition is the main mechanism of tritium retention. In 
tokamak machines with graphite divertor plates, e.g. JET and 
JT-60U, co-deposition layers of about 100 micron in thickness 
are observed. According to tritium retention analysis of CFC 
divertor plate in ITER, tritium inventory is calculated to be 
hundreds of grams after 1000 shots of 1000 s pulse.15 This may 
be a maximum value of the tritium inventory because any wall 
conditioning effect is not included. However, especially, in the 
case of CFC material effective reduction of the tritium inventory 
of the codeposition layer is required. 
Wall conditioning for ITER 
Based on the existing results in laboratories and tokamaks, base- 
line methods of wall conditioning for ITER are glow discharge 
cleaning (GDC) for zero-magnetic field, and electron cyclotron 
resonance discharge cleaning (ECRDC) and divertor active 
pumping for high magnetic field. In addition to these methods, 
alternative methods include Taylor type discharge cleaning 
(TDC), disruptive shot discharge cleaning (DDC), tokamak shot 
discharge cleaning and thin film coating using reactive gas will 
be used only if ECRDC is not effective for the wall conditioning 
between-shot. Recently, ion cyclotron resonance discharge 
cleaning (ICRDC) has been proposed for between-shot discharge 
conditioning.16 To obtain optimum conditions for ITER wall 
654 conditioning, technology and physics R & D are required. Pre- 
liminary assessments of these methods are as follows; 
Baseline methods. (1) Baking: Baking will be done by the vacuum 
vessel heating system using pressurised hot water. Maximum 
baking temperature is limited to be about 200 “C because mech- 
anical stress resulting from the pressurised water must be less 
than 2 MPa. But, in case of the divertor cassettes, baking with 
higher temperatures up to 350 “C is planned if graphite materials 
are used widely. The assembled torus system will be baked at 200 
“C for 100 h at maximum until impurity partial pressures drop 
to < 10m3 Pa. All surfaces will be maintained at 2 150 ‘C between 
plasma shots to minimise impurity re-absorption and H-trapping. 
(2) GDC: GDC is widely used in the existing tokamaks.5,h 
However, GDC under a high magnetic field is difficult. GDC will 
be done only in the initial machine commissioning phase prior to 
the first plasma. The GDC system is designed for H2,Dz, He and 
reactive gases. GDC anodes will be attached to the vacuum vessel. 
Both fixed and movable type probes will be considered. Eight 
anodes will be installed although their location is yet to be deter- 
mined. Since GDC current density in the existing machines is 
about 10 PA cm-‘, total current is about 100 A assuming first 
wall surface area of 1000 m’. So, a GDC anode is designed for 
20 A discharge current. Maximum operation for each cleaning 
cycle is designed to be 100 h. GDC will begin gently, keeping 
impurity partial pressures 5 10-j Pa, then increase the surface 
flux to - lOI4 cmmZss for rapid conditioning. 
(3) ECRDC: ECR discharge cleaning is established method in 
the existing tokamaks during high magnetic field.’ In ITER, the 
existing ECRH system would be used. Multi gyrotron sources 
with different frequency (90, 130, 170 GHz) will be prepared for 
plasma start-up and heating/current drive. Figure I shows the 
resonance position vs toroidal magnetic field and ECR frequency. 
For BT = 5.7 T at the plasma center (R = 8.1 m), the resonance 
position can be at R = 10 m and R = 7 m using 130 GHz and 
I70 GHz. In this case, the resonance location cannot be located 
at the inner region of the vacuum vessel. For BT = 4.0 T at 
plasma center (R = 8.1 m), the resonance position can be at 
R = 10.5 m. R = 7 m and R = 5 m using 90 GHz, 130 GHz and 
170 GHz. In this case, the resonance location can be moved 
discretely throughout the whole region. To sweep the resonance 
location from the outer region (R = 1 I m) to the inner region 
(R = 5 m) for efficient wall conditioning, the toroidal magnetic 
12 
GHz 
GHz 
GHz 
GHz 
GHz 
“4 6 10 12 
H.NBLlm”R/Feb.21.1995 
Figure 1. Resonance position vs toroidal magnetic field and ECR 
frequency. 
H Nakamura et al: Wall conditioning in ITER 
field would need to be changed slowly from BT = 5.7 T to BT = 4 
T with three different frequencies (90 GHz, 130 GHz and 170 
GHz). For sweeping of the toroidal magnetic field (5.7 T + 4 
T + 5.7 T). about 4300 s is required. Since the interval time 
between shots is 2200 s in reference operation, this sweeping 
operation would need an increase of the interval time. Based on 
the previous work by Sakamoto.’ the dominant power loss pro- 
cess during ECRDC is that for molecular dissociation. In TEX- 
TOR tokamak, this power loss is estimated to be 1.7 kW. 
Assuming ECRDC plasma parameters in ITER are same as in 
TEXTOR. ECRDC power is proportion to plasma volume. So. 
the required power is about I MW because the plasma volumes 
are 2.2 m’ in TEXTOR and about 1000 m’ in ITER. The effect 
of ECRDC with helium gas on between-shot wall conditioning 
needs further evaluation. To obtain optimum operation con- 
ditions for efficient wall conditioning, technology R & D is 
required. Also, physics R & D in tokamak machines. e.g. 
TEXTOR. Alcator C-Mod and other devices, will be done. 
(4) Divertor pumping: During plasma operation, the present 
divertor pumping with 200 mi 5-l of total pumping speed will 
have a significant effect on reduction of hydrogenic species reten- 
tion in the wall. The plasma exhaust is designed for a neutral 
pressure of 0.1 Pa to IO pa at the inlet of the pumping duct. 
During DT burn. total exhaust rate is about 50 pam’ s ’ to 
200 pam’ s ’ (IO” particles). Although qualitative evaluation on 
reduction of tritium inventory in ITER needs more experimental 
data, recent results in DIII-D” and Tore Supra” suggest elfec- 
tiveness of the external active pumping on wall conditioning. 
Alternative methods. (I) TDC, DDC and tokamak shot discharge 
cleaning: These methods have been used in existing tokamaks. 
For ITER, these cleaning methods can be used for between-shot 
conditioning at high field. In tokamak shot discharge cleaning, 
end-of-shot He gas injection or special ohmic He discharges with 
edge pumping will be done. These methods need feasibility studies 
on plasma control issues, e.g. plasma equilibrium of low plasma 
current discharge. To obtain optimum conditions for ITER, 
physics R & D will be undertaken in existing tokamaks. 
(2) Thin film coating: For wall conditioning, thin film coatings 
using reactive gases or evaporation sources will be considered if 
the currently proposed wall conditioning method is not effective 
for the between-shot wall conditioning. For thin film coating by 
reactive gas. candidate gases are Be, B, C and Si. Recently, 
boronization using ECRDC has been demonstrated in the Heli- 
otron-E device.” For thin film coating by evaporation source, 
candidate materials are Li and Be. At present, surveys of the 
experimental results in laboratories and plasma devices are star- 
ted. Design consideration of thin film coating systems will be 
done if application of this method to ITER wall conditioning is 
justified. 
(3) ICRDC: For ICRDC, the existing ITER ICRF system with 
the frequency range between 40 MHz to 90 MHz could be used. 
According to calculations of ICRDC, high energy He” around a few hundred eV will be produced with helium gas.” However, to 
define the system parameters of ICRDC, further R & D and 
demonstration in tokamak experiments are necessary. 
Summary 
For baseline methods of ITER wall conditioning, GDC for zero- 
magnetic field, and ECRDC and divertor active pumping for 
high magnetic fields are proposed. As alternative methods, TDC, 
DDC. tokamak shot discharge cleaning, thin film coating and 
ICRDC are evaluated. To select wall conditioning methods and 
obtain optimum conditions, technology R & D is planned. To 
clarify the effectiveness of the proposed wall conditioning 
methods, guidance on the implications of physics R & D in 
existing tokamaks will be sought from the physics expert group.‘” 
Acknowledgements 
This report is an account of work undertaken within the frame 
work of the ITER EDA Agreement. Neither the lTER Director, 
the Parties to the ITER EDA Agreement. the IAEA or any 
agency thereof, or any of their employees, makes any warranty, 
express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility 
for the accuracy. completeness. or usefulness of any information, 
apparatus. product, or process disclosed, or represents that its 
use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein 
to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade 
name. trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necess- 
arily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or 
favouring by the parties to the ITER EDA Agreement. the IAEA 
or any agency thereof.The views and opinions of authors expre- 
ssed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of ITER 
Director, the Parties to the ITER EDA Agreement. the IAEA or 
any agency thereof. 
References 
‘P H Rebut, Nuc+I;u.sion. 32, 187 (1992). 
‘R J Hawryluk. Ph~,s Rer L&l, 72, 3526 (1994). 
‘J Winter. J Nucl Mater, 176177, 14 (1990). 
‘H F Dylla ct ~1.. J Nucl Muter, 162-164, IX (1989). 
‘G Jackson, Nucl Fusion, 30, 2305 (1990). 
‘K J Dietz, Proc IX Ini Vacuun~ C’on,yre.s.v ~tztl S//I III/ Con/ WI Solid 
Su,-fi-rc~s, Madrid (1983) p 706. 
‘Y Sakamoto, PIOL. IX Ini Vucuunz Con,yc~s.r rod 51/r In/ Conj’ OH Solid 
Surfacrs. Madrid ( 1983) p 7 16. 
“L Oren. Nucl Fusion, 17, 1143 (1977). 
‘J Winter, J Nucl Muter. 145147, I31 (1987). 
‘“J Winter, J Nut,/ Maler. 162-164, 713 (1990). 
“J van Seggern e/ al., Nucl Muter. 220-222, 677 (lYY5). 
“J Dietz. Vrrcuum. 47, 91 I (1996). 
“H Nakamura et al.. Paper PS3-014 in this conference. 
lJP Mioduszewski i’f a/.. J Nucl Mnwr. 22&222, 91 (1995). 
“G Federici (‘I rrl., to be published in Prm ~~f’.S~~n~po.viwn OH Fu.sior~ 
En,qirwrri~y ( 1995). 
IbD Cowgill (‘I (II., private communication. 
“T Loarer c’t 01.. J Nucl Muter, 220-222, I X.3 (lY9i). 
lXT Mizuuchi. private communication. 
‘“D Post and J Winter, private communication. 
655 
