Selective isolation and differentiation of a stromal population of human embryonic
stem cells with osteogenic potential
Linda Harknessa, Amer Mahmooda,c, Nicholas Ditzela, Basem M. Abdallaha,
Jens V. Nygaardb, Moustapha Kassema,c,⁎
aDepartment of Endocrinology & Metabolism, Laboratory for Molecular Endocrinology (KMEB), Medical Biotechnology Centre (MBC), Winsløwparken 25, University of Southern Denmark,
5000 Odense C, Denmark
bInterdisciplinary Nanoscience Centre, Faculty of Science, University of Aarhus, Ny Munkegade, building 1521, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark
cStem Cell Unit, Department of Anatomy, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
abstract article info
Article history:
Received 18 April 2010Revised 9 September 2010Accepted 15 September 2010Available online 30 September 2010
Edited by: R. Baron
Keywords:
Human embryonic stem cellsOsteogenic differentiationHyaluronic acidIn vivo bone formationThe derivation of osteogenic cells from human embryonic stem cells (hESC) has been hampered by the absence
of easy and reproducible protocols. hESC grown in feeder-free conditions, often show a sub population ofﬁbroblast-like, stromal cells growing between the colonies. Thus, we examined the possibility that these cells
represent a population of stromal (mesenchymal) stem cells (hESC-stromal). Two in house derived hES cell lines
(Odense3 and KMEB3) as well as an externally derived cell line (Hues8) were transitioned to feeder-freeconditions. A sub population of ﬁbroblast-like cells established between the hESC colonies were isolated by
selective adherence to hyaluronic acid-coated plates (100 μg/ml) and were characterized using a combination of
FACS analysis and staining. The cells were CD44
+, CD29+,C D 7 3+,C D 1 6 6+,C D 1 4 6+, and CD105+;a n d ,O c t 4−,
CD34−, CD45−and CXCR4−. When cultured in osteogenic differentiation media, up regulation of osteoblastic
lineage markers ( DLX5, MSX2, RUNX2, SPARC, ALP, COL1a1, BGLAP, IBSP, DCN, LOX-L4 ) and production of in vitro
mineralized matrix was detected. hESC-stromal cells loaded on a carrier and implanted either subcutaneously or
in a critical size calvarial defect in immune de ﬁcient mice for 10 weeks, resulted in new bone formation and
partial repair of the calvarial defect. In conclusion, hESC-stromal can be isolated from hESC cultures and represent
a good source for obtaining cells with osteogenic differentiation potential suitable for regenerative medicine
protocols.
© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Introduction
Human bone marrow stromal stem cells (hBMSC) (also known as
bone marrow mesenchymal cells, multipotent mesenchymal stem
cells, skeletal stem cells) are considered an accessible source of cells
that can differentiate into osteogenic cells, however their in vitro
proliferation ability is ﬁnite and the number of cells retrievable from
patients is limited [1]. In contrast to hBMSC, human embryonic stem
cells (hESC) are pluripotent cells that can differentiate into cells of all
three germ layers (endoderm, mesoderm, ectoderm) [2]. hESC have
several advantages relevant for studies of bone biology. hESC are asuitable model for studying the molecular mechanisms of stem cell
differentiation to mesoderm and osteo-progenitor cells. This infor-
mation is highly relevant since pathways, important for osteoblast
generation during development, are similar to osteoblast regenera-
tion following injury or disease in adult life [3]. In addition, hESC can
potentially provide a large number of cells with speci ﬁc character-
istics needed for regenerative medicine protocols e.g. treatment of
bone defects and non-healed fractures.
Three methods have been described to differentiate hESC into an
osteogenic phenotype: via an intermediate stage using embryoid
body (EB) formation [4–9], via induction through outgrowth culture
[10–17], or through co-culture with a more differentiated cell type
[18–21]. However, the ability of these culture methods to provide
homogeneous, ef ﬁcient and reproducible differentiation of hESC cells
into osteogenic cells has been limited. The ef ﬁciency of differentiation
is usually unreported, and resultant cell cultures are morphologically
and functionally heterogeneous and thus there is a concern that these
cells may form teratoma if used in clinical applications [22].
Furthermore, initiation of differentiation through EB leads to a
heterogeneous cell population and co-culture, and using cells from a
different species, could lead to potential contamination from animalBone 48 (2011) 231 –241
⁎Corresponding author. Department of Endocrinology & Metabolism (KMEB),
Medical Biotechnology Centre (MBC), Winsløwparken 25, University of Southern
Denmark, 5000 Odense C, Denmark. Fax: +45 6550 3950.
E-mail addresses: lharkness@health.sdu.dk (L. Harkness),
amahmood@health.sdu.dk (A. Mahmood), nditzel@health.sdu.dk (N. Ditzel),
babdallah@health.sdu.dk (B.M. Abdallah), jvn@inano.dk (J.V. Nygaard),
mkassem@health.sdu.dk (M. Kassem).
8756-3282/$ –see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bone.2010.09.023
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Bone
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/bone
products [23]. Finally, the osteogenic potential of the cells have
generally been based on in vitro criteria except in four reports where
the bone forming capacity was demonstrated in vivo either in
heterotopic subcutaneous bone formation following implantation in
immune de ﬁcient mice [4,7,21] or in diffusion chambers implanted in
the peritoneal cavity of the nude mice [9]. However, these studies
have not demonstrated that the bone observed was formed by theimplanted human cells and not due to a dystrophic calci ﬁcation
reaction of the recipient murine cells.
Hyaluronan (also called hyaluronic acid (HA) or hyaluronate) is a
non-sulfated glycosaminoglycan (GAG) of high molecular weight
which is widely distributed throughout connective, epithelial, skin
and neural tissues. It is one of the chief components of the
extracellular matrix and can bind to aggrecan, along with type II
collagen, which together form a major structural component of
cartilage [24]. HA has also been reported to play a role in early human
preimplantation embryogenesis [25].Within skeletal biology, HA has
multiple functions including migration and condensation of BMSC
[26], joint cavity formation and long bone growth [24].H Ai s
expressed in osteoblastic cells, osteocytes, osteoclasts and is a major
component in bone marrow suggesting a role in bone remodelling
[24,27] . One of HA's receptor's, CD44, has 21 variant isoforms due to
extensive alternative splicing. However, all isoforms of CD44 contain a
HA binding site in the extracellular domain [24,28] and binding of HA
to CD44 is implicated in migration, proliferation and cell adhesion to
extra cellular matrices [29].
The aim of this study was therefore to isolate and characterise an
osteoprogenitor cell population from hESC. We report here the
possibility of employing HA as a substrate to enrich for a stromal cell
population (called here hESC-stromal) with osteogenic differentiation
potential based on side-by-side comparison with bone marrow-
derived human stromal stem cells (hBMSC) and phenotypic charac-
terization both in vitro and in vivo . We have also demonstrated the
functional ability of hESC-stromal cells in participating in bone
healing in a critical calvarial defect in mice.
Methods and materials
Cell culture
Two in-house hESC lines, Odense3 and KMEB3, were derived and
used in accordance with Danish stem cell guide lines and approval
from the local Scienti ﬁc Ethical committee. The characterisation of
Odense3 and KMEB3 has previously been reported [30,31] . The
Hues8 cell line was kindly provided by D. Melton (Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Harvard University, Boston, Mass) [2]. All cell lines
were transitioned from routine culture on inactivated MEF feeders to
standardised in vitro feeder free conditions [30]. Brie ﬂy, hESC were
cultured in MEF-conditioned Melton's media (Knockout DMEM, 15%
KOSR, 1% NEAA, 1 mM Glutamax, 0.1 mM β-mercaptoethanol (all
Invitrogen, Taastrup, Denmark) and 0.5% human serum albumin
(HSA; CSL Behring GmbH, Marburg, Germany)) and supplemented
with 5 ng/ml hbFGF (Invitrogen, Taastrup, Denmark). Reduced
growth factor Matrigel
®(Becton Dickinson, Brøndby, Denmark)
was used according to the manufacturer's instructions. Within two
to three passages of transition a sub population of ﬁbroblast-like,
stromal cells developed between the hESC colonies. These cells have
been referred to here as hESC-stromal cells. The hESC-stromal cells
were isolated by plating both the colony and stromal cells onto
plates pre-coated with 100 μg/ml hyaluronic acid (Calbiochem/
Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in DMEM (Invitrogen, Taastrup,
Denmark) supplemented with 10% FBS (PAA, Pasching, Austria).
Very few colony cells attached to the hyaluronic acid, and within
two passages of culture on hyaluronic acid no residual colony cells
were found.Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry was carried out to establish a phenotypic pro ﬁle of
the hESC-stromal cells and to compare that pro ﬁle with a well
characterized hBMSC line established through over expression of
human telomerase gene (TERT) and called hMSC-TERT [32]. OD3-,
Hues8-, KMEB3-stromal cells as well as hMSC-TERT cells were stainedfor the pre-conjugated markers CD29-FITC (AbCam, Cambridge, UK);
CD34-PE (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark); CD44-PE, CD45-PE, CD73-PE,
CD146-PE and CD166-PE (all BD Pharmingen, Brøndby, Denmark);
CXCR4-PE and Oct3/4-FITC (all R&D Systems, Abingdon, UK); Tra1-
81-PE and CD105-APC (both eBioscience, Hat ﬁeld, UK). Cells,
trypsinised to a single cell suspension, were blocked in 2% BSA before
incubation with the above mentioned pre-conjugated antibodies, or
matched isotype controls, for 45 min on ice. All samples were then
analysed on a FACScan (BD Biosciences, Brøndby, Denmark) and data
evaluated using WinMdi ( http://www.cyto.purdue.edu/ ﬂowcyt/soft-
ware/Winmdi.htm ).
Differentiation to osteoblast, adipocyte and chondrocyte cells
hESC-stromal cells were plated, on tissue coated plastics (pre-coated,
for 30 min at RT, with 100 μg/ml hyaluronic acid in PBS) in high glucose
DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS (PAA, Pasching, Austria). Once 80%
conﬂuence had been achieved, cells were cultured in osteoblastic
induction mixture containing 100 nM dexamethasone (Sigma-
Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark), 50 μg/ml
L-ascorbic acid-2-phosphate
(Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark) and 10 mM β-glycerophosphate
(Calbiochem-Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). For adipocyte differentia-
tion, the cells were incubated at 100% con ﬂuency in adipocyte induction
mixture: DMEM plus 10% FBS media supplemented with 10% horse
serum (Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark), 100 nM dexamethasone
(Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark), 450 μM 1-methyl-3-isobutyl-
xanthine (IBMX, Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark), 1 μM Rosiglitazone
(BRL49653, Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, Michigan) and 5 μg/ml insulin
(Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark). For the chondrocyte lineage,
2×105cells were pelleted at 900 g for 5 min, and left overnight in
CDM (chemically de ﬁned media: DMEM:F12 (Invitrogen, Taastrup,
Denmark), 0.5% fraction V BSA (Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark), 1%
lipid concentrate (Invitrogen, Taastrup, Denmark) and 1 mM glutamax
(Invitrogen, Taastrup, Denmark)) supplemented with 10 nM dexameth-
asone (Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark), 50 μg/ml L-ascorbic acid-2-
phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark), 40 μg/ml L-proline
(Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark), 0.91 mM sodium pyruvate (Invi-
trogen, Taastrup, Denmark) and 1% insulin-transferrin-selenium +1
(ITS+, BD Biosciences, Brøndby, Denmark). Cells were incubated
overnight to form a pellet prior to the addition of 10 ng/ml TGF β1
(Peprotech, London, UK).
Quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis
All collected samples underwent total RNA extraction using TRIzol
(Invitrogen, Taastrup, Denmark; according to manufacturer's instruc-
tions), phase separation was carried out using chloroform and the
resultant pellets washed in isopropanol and 70% ETOH, before air
drying and resuspension in DEPC water. cDNA was constructed using
a revertAid H minus ﬁrst strand cDNA synthesis kit (Fermentas, St
Leon-Rot, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
qRT-PCR was accomplished using a MyIQ detection system (Bio-Rad,
Copenhagen, Denmark) in a 20 μl volume with 20 pmol of each
primer, 2× SYBERgreen (Bio-Rad, Copenhagen, Denmark) and 15 μg
cDNA. Using the ICycler optical system software (Bio-Rad, v3.1) and
Microsoft Excel, relative gene e xpression data was calculated.
Following normalisation to the reference gene β-actin, quanti ﬁcation
of gene expression was carried out using a comparative Ct method232 L. Harkness et al. / Bone 48 (2011) 231 –241
where ΔCT is the difference between the CT values of the target and
reference gene.
At days 0, 5, 10 and 15 of osteoblast (OB) or adipocyte (AD)
induction, cells were taken for qRT-PCR (OB: alkaline phosphatase
(ALP),D L X 5 ,R U N X 2 ,M S X 2 ,c o l l a g e n1 α1(COL1a1 ), osteocalcin
(BGLAP ), osteonectin ( SPARC ), decorin ( DCN), lysyl oxidase 4 ( LOX-
L4), and bone sialoprotein ( IBSP); AD: adipocyte-speci ﬁc lipid binding
protein 2 ( aP2),PPARγ2and C/CEBP α). At days 0, 7, 14 and 21 of
chondrocytic differentiation cell pellets were taken for qRT-PCR
(SOX9 , collagen 2 α1(COL2a1 ), aggrecan ( ACAN ),ALP, RUNX2,
COL1a1 ). All primers were obtained from DNA Technology A/S
(Risskov, Denmark).
Cytochemical and immunohistochemical stainingCytochemical
Alizarin red (AZR, Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark) and alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) staining for OB differentiation was carried out
following ﬁxation using either ice cold 70% ETOH for 1 h (AZR) or
0.10 mM citrate buffer pH 4.2/acetone ﬁx (ratio 3:2) for 5 min at RT
(ALP). Cells were incubated in 40 mM AZR at pH 4.2 for 10 min at RT
before examination for the presence of mineralised matrix. ALP
staining was carried out in a solution of 0.2 mg/ml Napthol AS-TR
phosphate substrate (Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark) in water
combined with 0.417 mg/ml of Fast red (Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby,
Denmark) in 0.1 M Tris (pH 9.5) for 1 h at RT. Following ﬁxation in 4%
PFA for 10 min, Oil red (OR, Sigma-Aldrich, Brøndby, Denmark; 0.5 g
in 60% isopropanol) staining for lipid deposition was carried out at RTfor 1 h before counterstaining in haematoxylin. Pellets of cells
undergoing chondrocytic differentiation were ﬁxed for 10 min in 4%
PFA, washed in PBS, processed and embedded in paraf ﬁn before
sectioning and staining.
Immunohistochemical
Routine protocols [31] were used to stain for SOX9 (1:200, R&D
Systems, Abingdon, UK), collagen type 1 (1:200, AbCam, Cambridge,
UK), human (Vimentin 1:400, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) and Tra1-85
(1:100, Chemicon/Millipore, Copenhagen, Denmark). Brie ﬂy, immu-
nocyto- and histo-chemical staining was performed using DAKO En
Vision+ and PowerVision according to manufacturer's instructions.
Primary antibodies were diluted in ChemMate Antibody diluent
(S2022, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) and processed on an automatic
slide processor (Techmate500, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) using the
dilutions stated above.
Analysis was carried out on an IX50 Olympus microscope using
OlympusDP Software v3.1 (Olympus, Essex, UK) or a Leica DM4500
(Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) using the Surveyor Turboscan Mosaic
acquisition imaging analysis system v5.04.01 (Objective Imaging Ltd,
Cambridge, UK).
In vivo implantation studiesTeratoma formation
Undifferentiated OD3-stromal cells were implanted, in a 1:2
dilution of Matrigel®basement membrane matrix (BD Biosciences,
Brøndby, Denmark) in Knockout DMEM, subcutaneously under the
dorsal surface of 4 NOD/MrkBomTac-PrkdcSCIDmice for a period of
8 or 10 weeks [33]. Each mouse (n=4) received 2×106cells at each
of 2 implantation sites. As no teratoma was formed from implantation
of OD3-stromal cells identi ﬁcation of injection sites where cells had
been placed was dif ﬁcult. However 87% (7/8) of implantation sites
were identi ﬁed by the residual Matrigel®plug and a small amount of
tissue recovered. Implantation sites were ﬁxed in 4% PFA, embedded,
sectioned and stained with H&E and Tra1-85 (1:100, Chemicon/
Millipore A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark), to establish human cell
identi ﬁcation. Additionally, 3 –4×106hESC-KMEB3 cells wereimplanted in 4 injection sites under the dorsal surface of 1 NOD-
SCID mouse in a 1:2 dilution of Matrigel®to establish teratoma
formation. Teratomas were removed at 4 –5 weeks due to vacuolation
of the hESC induced teratoma tissue. hESC-KMEB3 formed teratoma
containing tissues derived from the three germ layers as previously
reported [31].
In vivo bone formation assay
One million OD3-hESC-stromal cells undergoing osteoblast differ-
entiation (5 days) and non induced cells, were implanted in NOD/
MrkBomTac-PrkdcSCIDmice in combination with 40 mg hydroxyap-
atite-tricalcium phosphate (HA/TCP, Triosite 0.5 –1 mm granules,
Biomatlante/Zimmer, Vigneux de Bretagne, France). Ten weeks after
implantation the scaffold was removed and ﬁxed in 4% PFA before
embedding in paraf ﬁn. Sections were stained with haematoxylin and
eosin (H&E), collagen type 1 (1:200, AbCam, Cambridge, UK), Tra1-85
(1:100, Chemicon/Millipore, Copenhagen, Denmark), human Vimen-
tin (1:400, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) and Sirius red. KMEB3-hESC
cells (3 –4×106) were, in addition, seeded onto HA/TCP and implanted
into NOD-SCID mice to establish if cells, adherent to the scaffold,
formed teratomas or if the presence of scaffold impeded teratoma
formation. Scaffolds were removed after 8 weeks and processed asabove.
Critical-sized calvarial defect
A critical-size calvarial defect model was established as described
by Gupta et al. [34]. In brief, 3-mm circular calvarial defects were
created in the right and left parietal bones in two or three month old
NOD/MrkBomTac-Prkdc
SCIDmice using a biopsy punch (Kai Medical,
Solingen, Germany). The dura mater was carefully removed to
prevent regeneration of bone from this source. In order to allow the
visualization of bone healing using μCT scanning, cells, at a
concentration of 10 –15,000/cm2, were seeded onto either a PCL ﬁlm
or Healos®Bone Graft Replacement (gifted from Protesekompagniet,
Albertslund, Denmark) which is currently being used in the Clinic for
treating bone defects ( http://www.depuyacromed.com/products/
biologicssolutions/healos.asp ). Cells seeded onto the scaffolds were
incubated for 2 h to allow cells to adhere to the scaffold prior to
additional media being added. PCL ﬁlm was fabricated from a Solvay
polycaprolactone (grade 6405) ﬁlm, by dissolving in HPC grade 1,4-
dioxane. The dissolved ﬁlm was distributed across a glass surface and
the dioxane evaporated in a fume hood. Finally, the ﬁlm was placed in
a vacuum oven to eliminate the rest of the dioxane. A 3 mm implant of
the resultant PCL ﬁlm or Healos®was inserted under the defect. In
each animal one defect was assigned PCL ﬁlm or Healos®scaffold
without cells and one defect with OD3-stromal cells seeded onto it.
For the PCL ﬁlm the cells were seeded on the underside of the scaffold,
the Healos®scaffold is permeable so the cells were seeded throughout
the scaffold. Four mice (PCL ﬁlm) and two mice (Healos®) received
cells which had undergone 5 days of in vitro osteogenic induction after
seeding on the scaffold; four mice (PCL ﬁlm) and three mice (Healos®)
received cells grown on the for 5 days which had not received
osteogenic induction. HA/TCP was not employed in the calvarial
defect model as μCT scanning studies cannot be carried out since the
radiodensity of the HA/TCP is equivalent to that of bone.
Samples were harvested 14 weeks after implantation and calvaria
were ﬁxed in 4% formalin for 3 days before decalci ﬁcation in 0.38 M
EDTA, di sodium salt, pH 7.2 for 5 days. The defects were embedded,
sectioned (5 μm) and stained for human Vimentin (1:400, Dako,
Glostrup, Denmark), Tra1-85 (1:100, Chemicon/Millipore, Copenha-
gen, Denmark), Sirius red and H&E. To detect healing, microcomputed
tomographical ( μCT) scanning images were obtained from mice used
in the critical sized calvarial defect study at weeks 3 and 14 weeks
(PCL ﬁlm) and 2 and 14 weeks (Healos®). Using a VivaCT40 scanner
(Scanco Medical AG, Bassersdorf, Switzerland), a two-dimensional233 L. Harkness et al. / Bone 48 (2011) 231 –241
images was acquired from the calvarial defect area from which 3-
dimensional reconstructions with a cubic voxel-size of 38 μm were
generated. Images were analysed using the built in software.
Results
Isolation of hESC-stromal cells using selective adherence to HA coated
plates
hESC lines, transitioned from culture on inactivated MEF feeders
(Fig. 1 A) to feeder free culture conditions in the presence of Matrigel®
and MEF conditioned media (see above), contained two distinct
populations of cells: hESC colonies ( Fig. 1 A) and a sub population of
ﬁbroblast-like, stromal cells ( Fig. 1 C) (termed here hESC-stromal
cells). Changes in the localisation of expression of CD44 (HA receptor)
was noted in colony cells transferred from feeders to feeder free
conditions. CD44 was found to be highly expressed in colony cells
grown on feeders ( Fig. 1 A) but was absent in colony cells grown on
Matrigel®(Fig. 1 B). The hESC-stromal cells which appeared between
colonies grown on Matrigel®were CD44+. Culturing the cells on HA
coated wells enriched only for CD44+hESC-stromal cells and colony
cells (which were CD44−) did not adhere ( Fig. 1 C). Transferring hESC
directly from feeder cultures to HA coated wells did not select for a
stromal cell population as the majority of colony cells (CD44+)
adhered to the matrix. As seen in Fig. 1 D, hESC-stromal cells
proliferated readily in culture with a population doubling time
(PDT) of 24 h and continued this growth rate for over 15 passages
without evidence of in vitro replicative senescence. Fig. 1 E demon-
strates that hESC-OD3 grown on Matrigel®, in the absence of stromalcells, are 100% CD44−and that hESC-stromal cells isolated from hESC
cultured on Matrigel®are 100% CD44+. To test if the hESC-stromal
cells could revert to pluripotential colony cells, the cells were re-
cultured, after 5 passages on HA, on Matrigel®in presence of MEF
conditioned media supplemented with hbFGF. No colony formation
was observed suggesting that the hESC-stromal cells had become
established as a differentiated cell line, these cells were, moreover,negative for the pluripotency marker Oct3/4 ( Fig. 2 supplementary
data). Additionally, karyotypic analysis was performed on the
parental hESC and hESC-derived stromal cells and both were normal
(data not shown).
In vitro expansion or differentiation of hESC-stromal cells can be
performed in absence of HA
In order to establish whether the presence of HA was needed for the
maintenance, growth and the differentiation status of hESC-stromal
cells, cells at passage 3 and 10, were transferred to wells with or without
precoating with HA. No change was observed in cell morphology,
surface marker expression (passage 3 data: CD44, CD73, CD105, CD146,
CD166, Fig. 1A supplementary data ) or proliferation capacity ( Fig. 1 C) of
the cells. Similarly, no signi ﬁcant differences in gene expression ( RUNX2,
ALP, BGLAP, COL1a1 ) were seen in hESC-stromal cells, undergoing
osteoblast differentiation, grown with or without HA as a matrix
(Fig. 1B –E, supplementary data , n=3 independent experiments).
Additionally, we did not observe spontaneous up regulation of
osteoblastic gene expression in hESC-stromal cells examined at days
1, 5, 10 and 14 of culture ( Fig. 1B –E, supplementary data ).
Fig. 1. Localisation of CD44 in hESC-OD3 and OD3-stromal cells. Staining results from hESC-OD3 line showing the change in localisation of CD44 between cells grown on (A) an
inactivated feeder layer (20 μm) and then (B) transitioned to Matrigel® and conditioned media (100 μm). CD44 was found to be expressed in pluripotent colony cells when grown
on feeders but was down regulated in the colony cells and subsequently expressed in hESC-stromal cells when grown on Matrigel®. (C) OD3-stromal cells grown on hyaluronic acid
(100x magni ﬁcation). (D) growth curves over 6 passages for OD3-stromal grown with and without hyaluronic acid as a matrix, no difference was seen in the plating ef ﬁciency,
proliferation rate or population doubling between the two growth conditions. (E) upper panel: Flow cytometric analysis of hESC-OD3 grown on Matrige l®in MEFCM in the absence
of stromal cells showing the hESC are negative for CD44; lower panel: isolated OD3-stromal cells showing all cells positive for CD44.234 L. Harkness et al. / Bone 48 (2011) 231 –241
hESC-stromal cells exhibit surface markers of human bone marrow
stromal stem cells (hBMSC)
Flow cytometry was carried out on three hESC-stromal cell lines
using cell surface markers employed to de ﬁne hBMSC [35] and
compared to a well-described hMSC-TERT line [32,36] . hESC-stromal
cells were CD44+,C D 7 3+, CD105+, CD146+, CD166+and the
percentage of positive cells were comparable to the hMSC-TERT for
CD44, CD73 and CD105 ( Fig. 2 ). Fewer positive cells were found in
CD146 and CD166 in the hESC-stromal cells as compared with hMSC-
TERT (70 –90% positive hESC-stromal as compared with 100% positive
hMSC-TERT; Fig. 2 ). The hESC-stromal cells lost their pluripotency
markers Oct3/4 and Tra1-81, and were also CD45−, CD34−and CD184−
(CXCR4) ( Fig. 2 supplementary data ). This data demonstrates that hESC-
stromal cells exhibit an hMSC-like phenotype.
hESC-stromal cells differentiate to osteoblastic (OB) cells
In the presence of osteogenic induction mixture, hESC-stromal
cells underwent osteoblastic differentiation as evidenced by up
regulation of several osteoblast speci ﬁc genes during a 15 day in
vitro differentiation period. The relative expression levels of canonicalosteogenic markers DLX5, MSX2, RUNX2, ALP, COL1a1, SPARC, BGLAP,
and IBSP reached a maximal up regulation between days 4 and 11 of
osteoblast differentiation ( Fig. 3 G, n=3 independent experiments).
In addition, recently identi ﬁed markers, predictive for in vivo bone
formation, ( DCN and LOX-L4 ) were up regulated during osteogenic
induction [37]. In addition, the cells formed mineralized matrix that
stained positive for alizarin red at 15 days of osteogenic induction(Figs. 3 A–F). In a side-by-side comparison with hMSC-TERT cells,
hESC-stromal cells exhibited similar responses to osteoblastic
induction with similar levels of enhanced gene expression of MSX2,
ALP,SPP1,LOX-L4, DCN andTWIST1 . However, differences also existed
with lower levels of gene expression of DLX5 (regulator of RUNX2 ),
RUNX2 and BGLAP and increased gene expression of COL1a1 in hESC-
stromal compared to hMSC-TERT ( Fig. 3 Supplementary data ).
hESC-stromal cells differentiate to adipocytic (AD) cells
hESC-stromal cells were able to differentiate to adipocytic cells in
the presence of adipogenic induction mixture. After 5 days of
induction, small lipid droplets were visible within the cells and by
day 15, cells ﬁlled with lipid droplets, that stained positive for oil red,
were readily demonstrable ( Fig. 4 ). Accumulation of intracellular
Fig. 2. Flow cytometric analysis of three hESC-stromal cell lines. FACS analysis comparing three hESC-stromal cell lines against hMSC-TERT. All cell lines show analogous numbers of
positive cells in all cell lines for CD44, CD73, and CD105. Small differences in the number of positive cells were seen in CD146 (hMSC-TERT 90% positive ; hESC-stromal 70 –90%
positive) and CD166 (hMSC-TERT 100% positive; hESC-stromal 80% positive).235 L. Harkness et al. / Bone 48 (2011) 231 –241
lipids was associated with up regulation in the expression of
adipocytic markers: adipocyte speci ﬁcPPARγ2,aP2 and C/EBP α
(Fig. 4 ). As shown by accumulation of lipid droplets stained with Oil
Red O, adipocytic differentiation in hESC-stromal cells was compara-
ble to that observed in the hMSC-TERT line ( Fig. 4 ). However,
comparison of the gene expression between the hESC-stromal cells
and hMSC-TERT cells showed that the expression level of PPARγ2was
much more enhanced, after d5 of differentiation, in the hMSC-TERT,
and C/EBP αmuch more enhanced in the hESC stromal-cells ( Fig. 4 ).
hESC-stromal cells did not exhibit in vitro differentiation to chondrocytic
cells
hESC-stromal cells were cultured for a maximum of 21 days as a
cell pellet, in the presence of chondrocytic differentiation factors.
Gene expression of the chondrogenic markers: COL2a1 , and ACAN , but
notSOX9 , were found to be up regulated at d21 ( Fig. 4 Supplementary
data).SOX9 gene expression showed down regulation during
differentiation. This compared with cell pellet staining (positive for
SOX9 at all time points (d0, d7, d14 and d21)) which showed
decreasing numbers of positive cells over time. Alcian blue staining
was not observed at any time point. Interestingly, collagen 1 exhibiteda high degree of positive staining at all time points as did Sirius red. In
addition, gene expression of a number of osteoblastic markers
(RUNX2, ALP, COL1a1 ) were up regulated during differentiation
(Fig. 4G Supplementary data ), and the gene expression levels were
comparable to those established in hESC-stromal cells undergoing
osteogenic differentiation.
hESC-stromal cells do not form teratoma in vivo
In order to study the degree of differentiation heterogeneity in
hESC-stromal cells, we examined their ability to form teratoma in vivo ,
a sin qua non for the undifferentiated pluripotent hESC. The parental
hESC employed to derive hESC-stromal cells were pluripotent and
formed teratoma as previously reported [31]. Conversely, hESC-
stromal cells did not form teratoma either when implanted with HA/
TCP (n=13) or in the presence of Matrigel®(n=8 implants) and cell
survival was con ﬁrmed by the presence of small islands of human
cells that stained positive with the human speci ﬁc Tra1-85 antibody
after 8 weeks of implantation ( Fig. 5A Supplementary data ). As a
positive control, hESC readily formed teratoma when implanted into
NOD/MrkBomTac-PrkdcSCIDin combination with Matrigel®[33] and
Fig. 3. Osteogenic induction of hESC-stromal cells. Osteogenic induction was performed on hESC-stromal cells over a 15 day period. AZR staining shows high l evels of matrix
deposition at day 15 (B, D, F) as compared with non induced control staining (A, C, E); (A, B) Hues8-stromal (C, D) KMEB3-stromal (E, F) OD3-stromal (all photographs shown at
500μm). (G) RT-PCR of relative expression levels, normalised to β-Actin, of OD3-stromal cells between days 0 and 13 of osteogenic induction (n=3 independent experiments). Data
shows up regulation of the canonical osteogenic gene markers ALP,DLX5 ,RUNX2 ,MSX2 ,COL1a1 ,SPARC ,BGLAP andIBSP, and the predictive in vivo bone formation markers LOXL4 and
DCN between days 4 and 11 of induction. All gene expression is down regulated within the 15 day period of measurement.236 L. Harkness et al. / Bone 48 (2011) 231 –241
no teratoma were formed by hESC when implanted in the presence of
HA/TCP (data not shown).
hESC-stromal cells form ectopic bone in vivo
Seven of 10 implants of hESC-stromal cells, either non-induced
(n=5) or after osteogenic induction (n=5), formed ectopic bone
when mixed and implanted with HA/TCP ( Fig. 5 A). No bone formation
was observed when HA/TCP was implanted without hESC-stromal
cells and stromal cells were shown to have cell survival after 10 weeks
of implantation with HA/TCP ( Fig. 5 Ac human speci ﬁc Tra1-85
staining). The implants contained bone adjacent to the HA/TCP
surfaces and stromal elements co ntaining adipocytes. Limited
hematopoietic cell in ﬁltration was observed ( Figs. 5 Aa and b (400×
mag.)). No difference was observed in the quantity of bone formed in
implants from osteoblastic-differentiated hESC-stromal cells (n=4)
compared to non induced hESC-stromal cells (n=3). We found no
evidence of cartilage formation in any of the implants.hESC-stromal cells participate in healing of critical-sized calvarial defect
In order to study the functional capacity of hESC-stromal cells in
vivo, we implanted the cells in a bone regeneration model of critical-
size calvarial defect in mice. The hESC-stromal cells (control and
osteoblastic-induced cells) were implanted for 14 –15 weeks. μCT
scanning, performed at 3 (PCL ﬁlm,Fig. 5 B) or 2 (Healos®,Fig. 5 D) and
14 weeks (both PCL ﬁle and Healos®;Figs. 5 B and D), showed
enhanced bone growth in defects implanted with hESC-stromal cells
and the bone growth was independent of prior OB induction (OB
induced implants=4 (PCL ﬁlm) or 2 (Healos®); non-induced hESC-
stromal cell implants=4 (PCL ﬁlm) or 3 (Healos®)). Histological
examination of the defect repair tissue showed bone growth on the
underside of both the PCL ﬁlm and the within the Healos®scaffold
(Figs. 5 C and E) where the hESC-stromal cells were seeded. In the PCL
ﬁlm a few osteocytes could be observed trapped within the new bone
matrix ( Figs. 5 Ca–c) where lamellar bone was formed. Control PCL
ﬁlm (no cells) inserted into the defect showed no sign of regenerative
Fig. 4. Adipocyte differentiation comparing staining of three hESC-stromal lines with hMSC and RT-PCR data comparing hESC-stromal cell line with hMSC. Ind uction of adipocyte
differentiation in the OD3-stromal (A –B), Hues8-stromal (C –D), KMEB3-stromal (E –F) and hMSC-TERT (G –H). All cell lines shows a similar pattern of oil red staining at d15 (A, C, E, G =
control; (B, D, F, H = induced. All photographs show a scale bar of 20 μm. (I) comparison of relative gene expression data following normalisation to β-Actin (n=3 independent
experiments) from OD3-stromal cell line ■with hMSC-TERT □. Expression levels of aP2look similar in hMSC-TERT and OD3-stromal cells at day 10 however the hESC-stromal cells, at d15,
show expression levels down regulated; PPARγ2data shows a much higher level in hMSC-TERT cells when compared with hESC-stromal cells; expression levels of C/EBP αare higher
expressed at all time points in hESC-stromal cells.237 L. Harkness et al. / Bone 48 (2011) 231 –241
Fig. 5. Subcutaneous implantation of OD3-stromal cells and in vivo bone formation in a calvarial defect model. (A) OD3-stromal cells were implanted subcuta neously, in combination
with HA/TCP scaffold, into NOD-SCID mice for 10 weeks. Image (a) and (b) H&E demonstrating both ectopic bone and adipocyte formation (200x and 400x mag . respectively)
(c) human speci ﬁc Tra1-85 staining indicating hESC-stromal cell survival following implantation with HA/TCP; and (d) collagen type 1 staining showing ectopic bone formation
(photographs at 200x magni ﬁcation unless speci ﬁed). (B) μCT images at 3 and 14 weeks after implantation of PCL ﬁlm with cells seeded on the underside. Bone is seen to have
formed on the right side of the defect where OD3-stromal cells were seeded on PLC ﬁlm; the blank ﬁlm on the left side shows no interference with the μCT scanning. (C) Mosaic scan
image of H&E staining of calvarial defect repair at 14 weeks. Control (PCL ﬁlm without cells) shows no bone generation while new bone is seen underlying the PCL scaffold. Images a,
b and c show new lamellar bone at 200× magni ﬁcation. (D) μCT images at 2 and 14 weeks after implantation using Healos®scaffold. Newly formed bone is seen to have formed in the
defect where OD3-stromal cells were seeded on Healos®scaffold; the blank scaffold on the left side shows no interference with the μCT scanning. (E) Mosaic image scan
demonstrating human vimentin staining in calvarial defect repair utilising Healos®scaffold at 14 weeks. Images (a) H&E staining from defect repair (100×); (b) human vimentin
staining demonstrating survival of hESC-stromal cells in defect repair (100×); (c) H&E staining of bone formation in defect repair (200×); (d) human vimentin staining
demonstrating new bone growth within the Healos®scaffold (200×).238 L. Harkness et al. / Bone 48 (2011) 231 –241
bone growth con ﬁrming that in the absence of hESC-stromal cells the
PCLﬁlm alone cannot contribute to bone repair. 3 mm circular
sections were cut from the PCL scaffold prior to insertion in the
calvarial defects, the remaining portion of PCL ﬁlm continued in
culture and was stained for AZR at d15 of induction ( Fig. 5B
supplementary data ). Staining showed that the ﬁlm was osteo-
conductive in vitro as evidenced by AZR staining showing calcium
deposition only in cells on PCL scaffold undergoing osteogenic
induction. Cells seeded on the PCL scaffold that did not undergo
osteogenic induction showed no calcium deposition; negative stain-
ing ( Fig. 5B supplementary data ) of non induced ﬁlm shows cells
seeded and grown in DMEM with 10% FBS. Further analysis of bone
regeneration on the Healos®scaffold using μCT scanning showed
enhanced bone growth throughout the scaffold seeded with cells
between 2 and 14 weeks implantation in four of ﬁve scaffolds
implanted. No difference was observed between those cells under-
going OB differentiation prior to implantation and those no receiving
OB induction. Although a little bone regeneration was noted in the
Healos®scaffold where cells were not implanted the degree of
regeneration was much less in comparison to Healos®where hESC-
stromal cells were added and their presence was veri ﬁed by staining
with human speci ﬁc vimentin staining ( Fig. 5 E). However, few
osteocytes were determined in the new bone and osteocytic cell
staining with human speci ﬁc vimentin was therefore not determined
(Fig. 5 E). The Healos®scaffold was not as effective in promoting bone
formation compared to PCL scaffold. Due to the few cells seen within
the bone in the implants we are unable to make an unequivocal
determination as to the human vs. murine origins of the newly formed
bone.
Discussion
In the present study, we provide evidence that stromal cells,
obtained from hESC cultures based on their selective adherence to HA,
exhibit known characteristics of the hBMSC phenotype includingknown surface markers, ability to differentiate to osteoblasts and
adipocyte, and formation of ectopic bone when implanted with HA/TCP
subcutaneously in immune de ﬁcient mice. We also provide preliminary
data that the cells are functional in vivo and can participate in bone
regeneration in a mouse calvarial defect model. We have also
demonstrated that the stromal cells originate from hESC and not from
murine MEFs. MEFs employed in hESC cultures are inactivated and
cannot replicate or contribute to the stromal cell population. Addition-
ally, when hESC are cultured on Matrigel
®(in the absence of MEFs), only
hESC colonies are visible initially and hESC-derived stromal cells only
become apparent after 2 or 3 passages in cell culture. Finally, implanted
hESC-derived stromal cells in calvarial defect model, stained positive for
human speci ﬁcv i m e n t i n .
We have employed HA to isolate a homogenous population of
hESC-stromal cells produced by hESC, cultured under feeder free
conditions in the presence of Matrigel®. Culturing hESC under feeder-
free culture conditions, such as on Matrigel®, has been demonstrated
to induce a sub population of differentiated ﬁbroblast-like cells
[38,39] . Stojkovic et al. have showed that these cells can function as
autogenic feeders capable of maintaining hESC pluripotency [39].
Some previous investigators have tried to establish a homogenous
culture of stromal cells [13,16] through non-speci ﬁc culture methods
of either cell sorting [13] (CD105+/CD24 −) or isolation via morpho-
logical identi ﬁcation of ‘epithelial-like ’cells [16]. However, both
methods are cumbersome, time consuming and can result in cultures
of heterogeneous cell populations. In contrast, enrichment for hESC-
stromal cells using hyaluronic acid as a matrix is easy to perform, and
exhibits a high degree of reproducibility and homogeneity in the
resultant cells.
The ability of HA to enrich for stromal cells may be dependent on
changes in CD44 expression during transition of hESC to Matrigel®aswe observed that hESC became CD44−and hESC-stromal cells were
positive for CD44. When hESC were directly transferred to HA without
the intermediate step of growth on Matrigel®, all cells plated.
Interestingly, HA did not allow the maintenance of pluripotent hESC
(unpublished observations) either after an intermediate step where
colonies were grown on Matrigel®or when directly transferred from
feeders to HA. Thus, it is possible that during the emergence of hESC-stromal cells, CD44 receptor shedding or changes in CD44 localisation
occur in response to stimulation of cytokines present in the
conditioned culture media [40].
HA was not found to contribute to hESC-stromal cells proliferative
abilities, morphology, phenotype or to enhance their differentiation
potential and thus is not required after the initial enrichment step
suggesting a role in osteoblastic cell commitment and not differenti-
ation. In contrast to this, in a recent paper, Zou et al. [41]demonstrated
that the addition of HA to bone marrow derived porcine MSC in
presence of osteogenic induction medium enhanced osteoblastic
differentiation.
Current protocols for osteogenic, adipogenic and chondrogenic
differentiation are predominantly based on methods used in the
differentiation of MSC and it is not known whether these methods are
optimal for differentiation in MSC derived from hESC. The differential
response of different stem cell populations to differentiation induc-
tion media is illustrated by the results of Hildebrandt et al. [42]. The
authors investigated osteogenic differentiation of cord-blood derived
MSC and reported that the use of dexamethasone at 10
−7, instead of
the more usual concentration of 10−8, in the presence of MSG-CM and
SingleQuot (commercially available media and growth supplement)
increased the expression of collagen type 1 and the deposition of
mineralised matrix in the absence of BMP2. This ﬁnding parallels our
use of dexamethasone at 10−7that resulted in high collagen type 1
production and enhanced matrix deposition. The majority of reports
of osteogenic and adipogenic induction in hESC-derived MSC-like
cells have employed standard differentiation protocols (osteogenic:
10% serum, 10 mM β-Glycerophosphate, 50 μM ascorbic acid and
100 nM dexamethasone; adipogenic: 10% serum, 10 μg/ml insulin,
1μMd e x a m e t h a s o n e ,0 . 5 μMI B M Xa n d2 0 0 μM indomethacin)
although with varying results. Of the 16 publications examined, 9
attempted adipogenic induction: two failed to differentiate cells
[10,14] to adipocytes and 2 reported cells with adipogenic potential
based on oil red O staining [15,17] . Thus, there is a need for more
optimized protocols for osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation of
cells derived from hESC. Overall the in vitro osteoblastic and
adipocytic cell differentiation protocols currently in use are not
optimal and need to be complemented with in vivo functional assays.
A number of different chondrogenic differentiation protocols have
been reported for hESC-derived cells. These included incubating the
cells with conditioned media and hydrogels, culturing the cells in pellets
or micromass cultures and the addition of a number of different
differentiation factors. Using the standard protocol for chondrogenic
differentiation of hBMSC, we were not able to obtain chondrogenic cells
from hESC-stromal cells. Several studies have examined the ability of
hESC-derived osteogenic cells for chondrogenic differentiation and the
results were variable (see Table 1 Supplementary data). Some studies
demonstrated some chondrogenic differentiation [7,13,19] while other
attempts were not successful [10,14] . Thus, it seems that the current
protocol for inducing chondrogenesis in hESC-osteogenic cells needs
further improvement. Alternatively, we observed the up regulation of
gene expression of DLX5 [43] and MSX2 [44],b o t hk n o w nt ob e
expressed during intramembranous ossi ﬁcation, suggesting that the
hESC-derived stromal cells recapitulate intramembranous and not
endochondral ossi ﬁcation. In addition, no chondrogenic cells were
identi ﬁed in any implants (subcutaneous or calvarial defect). However,
this hypothesis needs further veri ﬁcation in future studies.
Derivation of MSC-like cells from hESC has previously been reported
using a number of different approaches. Table 1 (Supplementary data)239 L. Harkness et al. / Bone 48 (2011) 231 –241
shows a compilation of different methods and results obtained. These
methods include direct differentiation employing withdrawal of
feeders, addition of PDGF or isolation and culture of spontaneous
differentiation [10–12,14,17] ; through an intermediate EB formation
[4–9]; or by co-culturing hESC with primary bone derived cells [18,21] ,
OP9 cells [19] or periodontal ligament ﬁbroblasts [20]. In addition,
methods were utilised for isolation of mesenchymal-like populationsbased on cell sorting employing a number of CD marker combinations:
CD13+/ −, CD71+, CD105+ [15] and CD105+, CD24 −[13]. Finally,
culturing hESC on gelatin-coated plates in presence of fetal calf serum
(FCS) for extensive periods has been reported to enrich for a
homogeneous population of cells with osteogenic characteristics [14].
However, the reported studies have several limitations. Several
publications relied on less speci ﬁcin vitro criteria for the osteoblastic
phenotype e.g. staining for mineralized matrix by Von Kossa or Alizarin
Red. Moreover, the homogeneity of the cells was not examined in detail.
In addition, comparison of the phenotype with well-established
osteoblastic cells has not been performed. Thus, we think that the
hESC-stromal cells described here represent a good alternative for
several of the described methods allowing generation for a large
number of functional osteoblastic cells based on in vitro and in vivo
criteria.
Few studies have demonstrated the ability of hESC-derived
osteogenic cells to form bone in vivo [4,9,45] . The HA-enriched
hESC-stromal cells formed normal bone when mixed and implanted
with HA/TCP as an osteoconductive scaffold. Also, hESC-stromal cells
implanted with Matrigel
®or HA/TCP did not form teratomas
suggesting the differentiation homogeneity of the resultant cells.
Furthermore, evidence for the hESC-stromal cells functional ability
was shown by demonstrating bone repair in a critical-size calvarial
defect model which is a classical model for bone regeneration [34].
μCT imaging showed good defect repair when cells were implanted
with an osteoconductive scaffold (Healos®) and also on PCL ﬁlm.
However, differences were observed in the amount and pattern of the
formed bone in these two scaffolds. Bone formed covered a maximum
of 25% of total bone defect area in Healos®scaffold vs. 76% in PCL ﬁlm.
Whereas bone formed on the PCL ﬁlm did not show extension beyond
the perimeter of the ﬁlm, in Healos®scaffold, the new bone formed at
the perimeter of the calvarial defect and was integrated with the
existing mouse bone. One limitation of our results is the inability todemonstrate that the newly formed bone is of human origin. Staining
with human speci ﬁc antibodies or in situ hybridization with human
Alu, were not sensitive to detect the limited number of osteocytic cells
present within the newly formed bone. However, some circumstantial
evidence makes it improbable that bone is of mouse origin. Bone was
formed on the surface of the PCL ﬁlm away from the edges of the
defects and positive staining for human cells was observed in cells
surrounding the newly formed bone within the Healos
®scaffold.
Conversely, there is a theoretical concern that the newly formed bone
may be of mouse origin that is induced through paracrine factors
secreted by the implanted cells [46]. The lack of enhanced effect on
bone regeneration by osteogenic induction of the cells prior to
implantation supports this hypothesis, however, this hypothesis
needs further examination.
The use of hESC as a source for clinical grade cells for regenerative
medicine protocols has been widely discussed. In addition to the
above mentioned ability for cell proliferation and cell differentiation,
these cells seem to be hypoimmunogenic. Drukker et al. [47]reported
that, due to low expression levels of MHC class-I and the absence of
MHC class-II molecules, immunostimulatory response of hESC and
their differentiated derivatives is low suggesting a lesser degree of
immune suppression is required when cell therapy protocols are
initiated. Recent development in the generation of patient speci ﬁc
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) provide a viable alternative for
hESC and for generating patient compatible, clinical grade cell.
However, iPS cells in their current forms are not suitable for therapydue to concerns related to their safety and transformation potential
[48].
In conclusion, we have described an easy and reproducible method
for isolating and expanding a highly homogenous population of cells
which are naturally produced in response to growth of hESC in feeder-
free conditions. These cells have been shown to have a mesenchymal-
like phenotype and have also proven to have a robust in vitro
osteoblastic differentiation capacity which is at least equal to the
differentiation potential of known osteogenic cell lines. Moreover the
cells do not form teratoma when implanted in vivo . These cells present
an important alternative to human MSC for studies on osteoblast
differentiation and are an important tool in the progression towards
cell-based therapy for bone diseases requiring bone regeneration.
Supplementary materials related to this article can be found online
atdoi:10.1016/j.bone.2010.09.023 .
Disclaimer
The authors have no potential con ﬂict of interest.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Ms. Lone Christiansen, Ms Bianca
Jørgensen and Mrs Stephanie Shouse for excellent technical assis-
tance. This work was supported by grants from the Lundbeck
Foundation, the Novo Nordisk Foundation, and from a local grant
supplied by the University Hospital of Odense.
References
[1] Kassem M, Abdallah B. Human bone-marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells:
biological characteristics and potential role in therapy of degenerative diseases.
Cell Tissue Res 2008;331:157 –63.
[2] Cowan CA, Klimanskaya I, McMahon J, Atienza J, Witmyer J, Zucker JP, et al.
Derivation of embryonic stem-cell lines from human blastocysts. N Engl J Med2004;350:1353 –6.
[3] Karsenty G. Minireview: transcriptional control of osteoblast differentiation.
Endocrinology 2001;142:2731 –3.
[4] Arpornmaeklong P, Brown SE, Wang Z, Krebsbach PH. Phenotypic characteriza-
tion, osteoblastic differentiation, and bone regeneration capacity of human
embryonic stem cell derived mesenchymal stem cells. Stem Cells Dev 2009;18:
1–14.
[5] Bielby RC, Boccaccini AR, Polak JM, Buttery LDK. In vitro differentiation and in vivo
mineralization of osteogenic cells derived from human embryonic stem cells.
Tissue Eng 2004;10:1518 –25.
[6] Brown SE, Tong W, Krebsbach PH. The derivation of mesenchymal stem cells from
human embryonic stem cells. Cells Tissues Organs 2009;189:256 –60.
[7] Hwang NS, Varghese S, Zhang Z, Ye Z, Cheng L, Elisseeff J. In vivo commitment and
functional tissue regeneration using human embryonic stem cell-derived
mesenchymal cells. PNAS 2008;105:20641 –6.
[8] Sottile V, Thomson A, McWhir J. In vitro osteogenic differentiation of human ES
cells. Cloning Stem Cells 2003;5:149 –55.
[9] Tremoleda JL, Forsyth NR, Khan NS, Wojtacha D, Christodoulou I, Tye BJ, et al. Bone
tissue formation from human embryonic stem cells in vivo. Cloning Stem Cells
2008;10:119 –32.
[10] Boyd NL, Robbins KR, Dhara SK, West FD, Stice SL. Human embryonic stem cell
derived mesoderm-like epithelium transitions to mesenchymal progenitor cells.
Tissue Eng A 2009;15:1897 –907.
[11] Heng BC, Toh WS, Pereira BP, Tan BL, Fu X, Liu H, et al. An autologous cell lysate
extract from human embryonic stem cell (hESC) derived osteoblasts can enhance
osteogenesis of hESC. Tissue Cell 2008;40:219 –28.
[12] Karlsson C, Emanuelsson K, Wessberg F, Kajic K, Axell MZM, Eriksson PS, Lindahl A,
Hyllner J, Strehl R. Human embryonic stem cell-derived mesenchymal progenitors —
potential in regenerative medicine. Stem Cell Res 2009;3:39 –50.
[13] Lian Q, Lye E, Suan Yeo K, Khia Way Tan E, Salto-Tellez M, Liu TM, et al. Derivation
of clinically compliant MSCs from CD105+, CD24 −differentiated human ESCs.
Stem Cells 2007;25:425 –36.
[14] Mateizel I, De Becker A, Van de Velde H, De Rycke M, Van Steirteghem A,
Cornelissen R, et al. Ef ﬁcient differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into a
homogeneous population of osteoprogenitor-like cells. Reprod Biomed Online
2008;16:741 –53.
[15] Olivier EN, Rybicki AC, Bouhassira EE. Differentiation of human embryonic stem
cells into bipotent mesenchymal stem cells. Stem Cells 2006;24:1914 –22.
[16] Ullmann U, In't Veld P, Gilles C, Sermon K, De Rycke M, Van de Velde H, et al.
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition process in human embryonic stem cells
cultured in feeder-free conditions. Mol Hum Reprod 2007;13:21 –32.240 L. Harkness et al. / Bone 48 (2011) 231 –241
[17] Trivedi P, Hematti P. Derivation and immunological characterization of mesen-
chymal stromal cells from human embryonic stem cells. Exp Hematol 2008;36:
350–9.
[18] Ahn SE, Kim S, Park KH, Moon SH, Lee HJ, Kim GJ, et al. Primary bone-derived cells
induce osteogenic differentiation without exogenous factors in human embryonic
stem cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2006;340:403 –8.
[19] Barberi T, Willis LM, Socci ND, Studer L. Derivation of multipotent mesenchymal
precursors from human embryonic stem cells. PLoS Med 2005;2:554 –60.
[20] Inanç B, Elçin AE, Elçin YM. Effect of osteogenic induction on the in vitro
differentiation of human embryonic stem cells cocultured with periodontal
ligament ﬁbroblasts. Artif Organs 2007;31:792 –800.
[21] Kim S, Kim SS, Lee SH, Eun Ahn S, Gwak SJ, Song JH, et al. In vivo bone formation
from human embryonic stem cell-derived osteogenic cells in poly( D,L-lactic-co-
glycolic acid)/hydroxyapatite composite scaffolds. Biomaterials 2008;29:
1043 –53.
[22] Dressel R, Schindehutte J, Kuhlmann T, Elsner L, Novota P, Baier PC, et al. The
tumorigenicity of mouse embryonic stem cells and in vitro differentiated neuronal
cells is controlled by the recipients' immune response. PLoS ONE 2008;3:1 –14.
[23] Miyabayashi T, Teo JL, Yamamoto M, McMillan M, Nguyen C, Kahn M. Wnt/ß-
catenin/CBP signaling maintains long-term murine embryonic stem cell plur-
ipotency. PNAS 2007;104:5668 –73.
[24] Bastow E, Byers S, Golub S, Clarkin C, Pitsillides A, Fosang A. Hyaluronan synthesis
and degradation in cartilage and bone. Cell Mol Life Sci (CMLS) 2008;65:395 –413.
[25] Choudhary M, Zhang X, Stojkovic P, Hyslop L, Anyfantis G, Herbert M, et al.
Putative role of hyaluronan and its related genes, HAS2 and RHAMM, in humanearly preimplantation embryogenesis and embryonic stem cell characterization.
Stem Cells 2007;25:3045 –57.
[26] Calabro A, Oken MM, Hascall VC, Masellis AM. Characterization of hyaluronan
synthase expression and hyaluronan synthesis in bone marrow mesenchymal
progenitor cells: predominant expression of HAS1 mRNA and up-regulatedhyaluronan synthesis in bone marrow cells derived from multiple myeloma
patients. Blood 2002;100:2578 –85.
[27] Noonan KJ, Stevens JW, Tammi R, Tammi M, Hernandez JA, Midura RJ. Spatial
distribution of CD44 and hyaluronan in the proximal tibia of the growing rat.
J Orthop Res 1996;14:573 –81.
[28] Day AJ, Prestwich GD. Hyaluronan-binding proteins: tying up the giant. J Biol
Chem 2002;277:4585 –8.
[29] Turley EA, Noble PW, Bourguignon LYW. Signaling properties of hyaluronan
receptors. J Biol Chem 2002;277:4589 –92.
[30] Harkness L, Christiansen H, Nehlin J, Barington T, Andersen JS, Kassem M.
Identi ﬁcation of a membrane proteomic signature for human embryonic stem
cells independent of culture conditions. Stem Cell Res 2008;1:219 –27.
[31] Harkness L, Rasmussen I, Erb K, Kassem M. Derivation and characterisation of hESC
lines from supernumerary embryos, experience from Odense, Denmark. In Vitro
Cell Dev Biol Anim 2010;46:259 –68.
[32] Simonsen JL, Rosada C, Serakinci N, Justesen J, Stenderup K, Rattan SIS, et al.
Telomerase expression extends the proliferative life-span and maintains theosteogenic potential of human bone marrow stromal cells. Nat Biotechnol
2002;20:592 –6.
[33] Prokhorova TA, Harkness LM, Frandsen U, Ditzel N, Schrøder HD, Burns JS, et al.
Teratoma formation by human embryonic stem cells is site dependent and
enhanced by the presence of matrigel. Stem Cells Dev 2009;18:47 –54.
[34] Gupta DM, Kwan MD, Slater BJ, Wan DC, Longaker MT. Applications of an athymic
nude mouse model of nonhealing critical-sized calvarial defects. J Craniofac Surg
2008;19:192 –7.
[35] Dominici M, Blanc KL, Mueller I, Slaper-Cortenbach I, Marini F, Krause D, et al. Minimal
criteria for de ﬁning multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells. The International Society
for Cellular Therapy position statement. Cytotherapy 2006;8:315 –7.
[36] Abdallah BM, Haack-S°rensen M, Burns JS, Elsnab B, Jakob F, Hokland P, et al.
Maintenance of differentiation potential of human bone marrow mesenchymalstem cells immortalized by human telomerase reverse transcriptase gene despite
of extensive proliferation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005;326:527 –38.
[37] Larsen KH, Frederiksen CM, Burns JS, Abdallah BM, Kassem M. Identifying a
molecular phenotype for bone marrow stromal cells with in vivo bone-forming
capacity. JBMR 2010;25:796 –808.
[38] Ludwig TE, Bergendahl V, Levenstein ME, Yu J, Probasco MD, Thomson JA. Feeder-
independent culture of human embryonic stem cells. Nat Meth 2006;3:637 –46.
[39] Stojkovic P, Lako M, Stewart R, Przyborski S, Armstrong L, Evans J, et al. An
autogeneic feeder cell system that ef ﬁciently supports growth of undifferentiated
human embryonic stem cells. Stem Cells 2005;23:306 –14.
[40] Isacke CM, Yarwood H. The hyaluronan receptor, CD44. Int J Biochem Cell Biol
2002;34:718
–21.
[41] Zou L, Zou X, Chen L, Li H, Mygind T, Kassem M, et al. Effect of hyaluronan on
osteogenic differentiation of porcine bone marrow stromal cells in vitro. J Orthop
Res 2008;26:713 –20.
[42] Hildebrandt C, Buth H, Thielecke H. In ﬂuence of cell culture media conditions on
the osteogenic differentiation of cord blood-derived mesenchymal stem cells. AnnAnat - Anat Anz 2009;191:23 –32.
[43] Holleville N, Mateos S, Bontoux M, Bollerot K, Monsoro-Burq AH. Dlx5 drives
Runx2 expression and osteogenic differentiation in developing cranial suture
mesenchyme. Dev Biol 2007;304:860 –74.
[44] Satokata I, Ma L, Ohshima H, Bei M, Woo I, Nishizawa K, et al. Msx2 de ﬁciency in
mice causes pleiotropic defects in bone growth and ectodermal organ formation.
Nat Genet 2000;24:391 –5.
[45] Kim SE, Kim BK, Gil JE, Kim SK, Kim JH. Comparative analysis of the developmental
competence of three human embryonic stem cell lines in vitro. Mol Cells 2007;23:
49–56.
[46] Crisostomo PR, Markel TA, Wang Y, Meldrum DR. Surgically relevant aspects of
stem cell paracrine effects. Surgery 2008;143:577 –81.
[47] Drukker M, Katchman H, Katz G, Even-Tov Friedman S, Shezen E, Hornstein E, et al.
Human embryonic stem cells and their differentiated derivatives are less
susceptible to immune rejection than adult cells. Stem Cells 2006;24:221 –9.
[48] Deng W. Induced pluripotent stem cells: paths to new medicines. EMBO Rep
2010;11:161 –5.241 L. Harkness et al. / Bone 48 (2011) 231 –241
