ORIGINAL ARTICLES
Evidence for a Dense and Intimate Innervation of the Bone
Tissue, Including Glutamate-Containing Fibers
C. M. SERRE, D. FARLAY, P. D. DELMAS, and C. CHENU
INSERM Unit 403, Faculte ´ de Medecine RTH Lae ¨nnec and Ho ˆpital E. HERRIOT, Lyon, France
The recent demonstration in bone cells of receptors for
glutamate (Glu), a major neuromediator, suggests that Glumay also act as a signaling molecule in bone and regulatebone cell metabolism. Although bone is known to be inner-vated, the distribution and characteristics of nerve fibers inthis tissue have not been well documented. We have studiedthe anatomical distribution of nerve fibers and the presenceof glutamate-immunoreactive ones in sections of long bonesfrom neonatal, 15-, and 25-day-old rats, using immunocyto-chemistry with antibodies directed against several neuronalmarkers and Glu. We showed by electron microscopy thatbone is rich in nerve-like processes running along vesselsadjacent to bone trabeculae, in the vicinity of hematopoı ¨etic
cells and bone cells. Immunocytochemical studies at thetissue and cellular level confirmed the presence of a densenetwork of thin nerve processes immunolabeled for neuro-filament 200, tyrosine hydroxylase, and microtubule associ-ated protein-2, three markers of nerve fibers. Some of thesenerve processes showed local dilatations in contact withmedullary cells and bone cells that were immunolabeled forsynaptophysin, a nerve terminal marker. Glu was largelyexpressed in these thin nerve processes in proximity to bonecells. These findings show evidence for a dense and intimatenetwork of nerve processes in bone, some of which werecontaining Glu, suggesting glutamatergic innervation inbone. (Bone 25:623–629; 1999) © 1999 by Elsevier ScienceInc. All rights reserved.
Key Words: Nerve fibers; Rat long bone sections; Immuno-
cytochemistry; Electron microscopy; Neurofilament 200;Glutamate.
Introduction
Pioneer studies, using light microscopy with methylene blue
staining1,29orsilverimpregnation5,6,24,34havedemonstratedthat
bone is innervated. Nevertheless, the distribution of nerve fibersin bone has not been well documented, and the discrimination offibers representing the sensory, sympathetic, and parasympa-thetic nervous system was not possible with conventional histo-logical techniques. Duncan and Shim
8have later shown the
presence of sympathetic nerve fibers in bone tissue by visualiz-ing noradrenaline. More recently, nerve fibers immunoreactivefor neuropeptides and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) have beendemonstrated in bone, indicating the presence of both sympa-
thetic and sensory fibers.
2,3,12,14,16,17,19,33These studies have
shown a high degree of peptidergic innervation in bone tissue inregionsofhighosteogenicactivity.However,immunocytochem-istry using antibodies directed against specific neuronal markershas not been performed at the cellular level in bone, and thedistribution of nerve fibers in the direct vicinity of bone cells isstill not well known.
Glutamate (Glu) is a major neuromediator of both the central
and peripheral nervous system.
26The recent identification of a
neuronal glutamate transporter in bone,25as well as the demon-
stration of the expression of different subtypes of Glu receptorsby both bone resorbing osteoclasts and bone forming osteo-blasts,
7,31suggest that Glu might be an important local regulator
ofbonecellfunctions.TheoriginofGluinboneisunknown,andone hypothesis is that its presence is due to innervation of thistissue. Clinical observations,
10,11,15as well as experimental and
in vitro studies,4,18,20,22,23have already established the involve-
ment of the peripheral nervous system in the regulation of bonedevelopment and bone remodeling.
The purpose of this study was to examine the anatomical
distribution of nerve fibers in bone and to identify Glu-immu-noreactive fibers. We used immunocytochemistry on long bonesections from neonatal, 15- and 25-day-old rats, with antibodiesdirected against several specific neuronal markers and Glu. Wehave demonstrated the presence of a dense network of nerveprocesses in the vicinity of bone cells, some of which containedGlu,suggestingtheexistenceofaglutamatergicinnervationinbone.
Materials and Methods
Animals and Tissue ProcessingNeonatal (few hours), 15- and 25-day-old Wistar rats were used
forthisstudy.Animalswerekilled,tibiaandfemurswererapidlyexcised, roughly cleaned of adherent tissues and immediatelyimmersed in 1% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylatebuffer, pH 7.3. Bones were cut transversely at the diaphysislevel, then longitudinally, and fixed for 24 h.
27After several
washings in sodium cacodylate buffer, all specimens were post-fixedwithpotassiumferrocyanide-reducedosmiumtetroxydefor2h .
30Undecalcified samples were immediately dehydrated
through a graded ethanol series and embedded in Epon, whereassome samples were partially decalcified in 4.13% disodiumethylenediamine-tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) for 5 days
35before
dehydration and embedding in Epon.
Semithinsections(0.8–1 mm)werecutonaReichertUltracut
E Microtome (Leica, Leitz, Austria). Some sections were stainedwith azur-methylene blue to enable selection of samples forAddress for correspondence and reprints: Dr. C. Chenu, INSERM Unit
403, Hoˆpital E. HERRIOT, Pavillon F, 69 437 Lyon Cedex 03, France.
E-mail: chenu@lyon151.inserm.fr
Bone Vol. 25, No. 6
December 1999:623–629
623 © 1999 by Elsevier Science Inc. 8756-3282/99/$20.00
All rights reserved. PII S8756-3282(99)00215-X
immunocytochemistry at tissue or cellular levels as well as for
transmission electron microscopy (TEM).
For TEM, thin sections (80 nm to 100 nm) were cut and
stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. Sections were ex-amined using a Jeol 1200EX electron microscope (Jeol Ltd.,Akishina, Tokyo, Japan) at 80 kV.
Immunocytochemistry
Antibodies. The monoclonal antibodies directed against neuro-
filament 200 (NF 200), synaptophysin and the microtubule as-sociated protein-2 (MAP2) were obtained from Sigma (St Louis,MO). The rabbit anti-tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and anti-gluta-mate polyclonal antibodies were purchased from Chemicon (Te-mecula, CA). The antibody used in this study recognizes freeGlu. The polyclonal antibody directed against human aI (1)
carboxy-telopeptide of type I collagen (LF-67) was provided byDr. L. Fisher (NIH, Besthesda, MD). The polyclonal antibodydirected against rat type III collagen was given by Dr. Hartmann(Novotec, Lyon, France). The anti-VIP polyclonal antibody wasa gift from Dr. J. L. Saffar (Paris, France). Controls wereperformed by using a monoclonal antibody directed against theKappa chains of immunoglobulins (MOPC21) or purified immu-noglobulins G from nonimmune rabbit serum.Semithin sections. Sections from decalcified samples were
laid on sylanized slides (aminopropyltriethoxyalsilane, 2% inacetone) and dried overnight at 37°C. Epon was removed with13.3% (w/v) potassium hydroxide in a methanol/propyleneoxyde (2/1) mixture and rehydrated. Sections were treated for 20min with 100 mM glycine and 50 mM ammonium chloride inTris buffer, pH 7.6 in order to saturate free aldehydic groups.Endogenous peroxydase activity was inhibited by incubation for15 min with 1% sodium azide and 1.5% H
2O2in 50% methanol,
and nonspecific immunoreactions were blocked for 30 min with
10% normal goat serum (NGS) in Tris buffer saline (TBS)containing 0.01% bovine serum albumin (BSA), according toIngram et al.
21Sections were incubated overnight with primary
antibodies diluted in TBS containing 1% NGS (dilutions ofantibodies: anti-NF200: 30 mg/mL; anti-MAP2: 1 mg/mL; anti-
synaptophysin: 6 mg/mL, anti-Glu: 1/1000; anti-TH: 1/15000;
anti-VIP: 1/2000; LF-67: 1/5000; anti-type III collagen (batch217): 1/1000). Control sections were incubated with nonimmunerabbit serum or with the monoclonal antibody MOPC21 whichhas no known hapten or antigen binding activity. Antigen-antibody complexes were detected with a peroxydase streptavi-din system (Dako, Copenhagen, Denmark) and revealed with3-39diaminobenzidinetetrahydrochloride(DAB)(Sigma)inTris
buffer containing 0.01% H
2O2. All washings were done with
Figure 1. Electron micrographs illustrating
nerve fibers and nerve processes in growing ratlong bones. (a) Distal metaphysis of 15-day-oldrat tibia in the vicinity of the afferent vasculartree. Part of a large nerve bundle containing anunmyelinatedaxon(arrow)linedwithaSchwanncell (S) is associated to the afferent vessel (AV).Inset: enlargement showing the structure of theaxon; microtubules (arrow head) are observed.(b) Endosteum of 25-day-old rat tibia. A nervefiber is observed close to an osteoblast (Ob).Numerous unmyelinated axons (arrows) are sur-roundedbyaSchwanncell(S1),whereasanotherSchwann cell (S2) shows a unique myelinatedaxon (asterisk). (c) Borderline between metaph-ysis and diaphysis of 15-day-old rat tibia. Anunmyelinated nerve fiber is present close to he-matopoı¨etic cells (H) in bone marrow. A
Schwann cell (S) contains several axons (ar-rows). (d) Metaphysis of neonatal rat femur. Athin nerve process is running between hemato-poı¨eticcells(H)andshowsanenlargement(large
arrow) in the vicinity of cells. (e) Metaphysis of15-day-old rat tibia. A nerve process (large ar-row) containing microtubules (arrows) and mi-crofilaments (arrow head) is observed in contactwith an osteoblast (Ob).624 C. M. Serre et al. Bone Vol. 25, No. 6
Glu-containing nerve processes in bone December 1999:623–629
TBS containing 0.02% Triton X100. Sections were counter-
stainedwithMeyer’shematoxylin(diluted1:3indistilledwater),dehydrated, and mounted in Xam (Gurr-BDH Laboratory, Poole,UK).
Ultrathin sections. Sections from decalcified and undecalci-
fied samples were collected on nickel grids covered with aformwarfilm.Gridswerefloatedfor10minonadropof50mMglycine in 0.05 M Tris buffer pH 7.4, transferred for 30 min ona drop of Tris buffer containing 1% BSA and 1% NGS, thenincubated for 90 min at room temperature on a drop of the
specific primary antibodies (dilutions of antibodies: anti-NF200: 60 mg/mL; anti-MAP2: 1 mg/mL; anti-TH: 1/5000;
anti-Glu: 1/500). After incubation, sections were rinsed ondrops of Tris buffer/BSA, placed on biotinyled anti-mouse oranti-rabbit antibodies (dilution: 1/300 in Tris buffer/BSA, pH7.4), then laid on gold streptavidin (Jansen, Tebu, France) atpH 8.2. After careful washing, grids were transferred to 1%glutaraldehyde, rinsed in distilled water, and conventionally
Figure 2. Immunohistochemical local-
ization of several nerve markers in longbones of growing rats. (a) Metaphysis ofneonatalratfemur.NF200-positivenerveprocesses (arrows), showing local en-largements (arrow heads), are runningalong bone trabaeculae (t) and vessels(V). They are close to bone cells (Oc:osteoclast, Ob: osteoblast) and hemato-poı¨etic cells (H). Original magnification:
31000. (b) Deep metaphysis of neonatal
rat femur at the level of the afferent ves-sel. Tyrosine hydroxylase is present inthese nerve processes (arrows) showinglocal dilatations (arrow heads) in contactwith hematopoı ¨etic cells (H). Oc: oste-
oclast. Original magnification: 31500.
(c) Deep metaphysis of neonatal rat fe-mur. MAP2-positive nerve processesshowing dilatations (arrow heads) in con-tact with hematopoı ¨etic cells (H) and os-
teoclasts (Oc). Original magnification:31000. (d) Diaphysis of 15-day-old rat
tibia. NF200 is present in nerve endings(arrow heads) in contact with hematopoı ¨-
etic cells (H). Original magnification:31000.
Figure 3. Immunolabelings for NF 200
and type I or III collagen are mutuallyexclusive in long bone sections. (a) and(b) Consecutive sections of neonatal ratfemur (metaphysis). Type I collagen (a)is visualized in bone matrix, osteoblasts(Ob) and preosteoblasts (POb) (arrows).NF200-positive nerve processes (b) arerunning in bone marrow close to osteo-blasts (Ob), hematopoı ¨etic cells (H) and
vessels (arrow heads). The labellingprofileobtainedin(b)iscompletelydis-tinct from that obtained in (a). Originalmagnification: 31000. (c) and (d) Con-
secutive sections of neonatal rat femur(metaphysis). Type III collagen (c) isobserved in the remaining cartilage ma-trix of the bone trabeculae (double ar-row) and in collagen fibrils in the bonemarrow (arrows). NF200-positive nerveprocesses(arrowheads)arelocatednearbonecellsandvessels.Thelabelingpro-fileobtainedin(d)iscompletelydistinctfrom that obtained in (c). Original mag-nification: 3400.625 Bone Vol. 25, No. 6 C. M. Serre et al.
December 1999:623–629 Glu-containing nerve processes in bone
stainedwithuranylacetateandleadcitratebeforeexamination
by TEM.
Some semithin sections from decalcified samples were im-
munolabeled for NF200 without Meyer’s hematoxylin counter-staining.Thesesectionsweredehydratedinethanol,impregnatedwith a mixture of propylene oxyde-Epon (v/v), and re-embeddedin Epon. Ultrathin sections were cut and observed withoutcounterstaining.
Results
Localization of Nerve Fibers in Long Bones of Growing RatsElectron microscopy studies of long bones from neonatal, 15-
and25-day-oldratsrevealedthepresenceofnervefiberseitherinthevicinityoftheperiosteumandsurroundingconnectivetissuesorinthemusclesattachedtoit.Someofthemwererunningalongveins and arteries. The diaphyseal nerve trunk, entering bonealongnutrientvessels,comprisedmainlynonmyelinatedfibersin15-day-old rats ( Figure 1 a). In the periosteum of 15- and
25-day-old rats, nerve fibers were generally unmyelinated,whereasintheendosteum,somemyelinatedfiberswereobservedin proximity to osteoblasts, more numerous in 25-day-old rats(Figure 1b). In bone marrow, only unmyelinated nerve fibersrunning between hematopoı ¨etic cells were demonstrated (Figure
1c).Myelinatednervefiberswereneverpresentintheendosteumor bone marrow of neonatal rats.
In addition to these sparse morphologically clearly identified
nervefibers,abundantthinnerve-likeprocesseswereobservedinlong bone sections. These ran along vessels adjacent to bonetrabeculae in the vicinity of hematopoı ¨etic and bone cells and
often showed enlarged endings in close contact with these cells.They were always devoid of basement membrane. NeitherSchawnn cells nor myelin sheath were observed at their periph-ery. The structural features of these nerve-like processes wereslightly different for neonatal and 15-day-old rats. In neonatalrats, nerve like processes contained only hyaloplasm and rareorganelles (Figure 1d). In older rats, more organelles wereobserved, such as small mitochondria, glycogen particles, anddense granules. Microfilaments, microtubules, or microvesicles,usually abundant in nerve fibers, were often visible in these cellprocesses (Figure 1e). In contrast, they contained no golgiapparatus and no endoplasmic tubular structures, generally de-scribed in stromal cells.
Immunoreactivity of these Nerve Processes For Several
Specific Neuronal Markers
An antibody directed against NF200, used as a general nerve
marker, revealed that the epiphysis of neonatal rats consistedonly of cartilage at this stage of development, and was devoid ofinnervation.Incontrast,inallthemetaphysisofneonatalratsandin the diaphysal area containing the nutrient vessels, a denseinnervation was observed that appeared as a prominent networkof thin cytoplasmic cell processes in close relation with bloodvessels (Figure 2a). Nerve endings, corresponding to dilatations
of these nerve processes, were found in contact with medullarycells and bone cells (Figure 2a). Hematopoı ¨etic cells, endothelial
cells, and bone cells were always negative for this marker in anypart of the bone. These nerve processes were also labeled for TH(Figure 2b) and MAP2 (Figure 2c), two other markers of nervefibers. Control sections, in which specific antibodies were re-placed by MOPC21 or by purified immunoglobulins G fromrabbit,showednospecificimmunoreactivity(datanotshown).Infemurs and tibia of 15- and 25-day-old rats, immunolabeling forneuronal markers stained the same network of nerve processesadjacent to blood vessels, bone marrow and bone cells. Its
distribution was slightly different for these later stages of devel-opment, because nerve processes were observed in the epiphysisin the secondary ossification center. They were localized inproximity to bone cells lining trabeculae facing the growth plate.The deeper part of the epiphysis appeared less innervated. In themetaphysis immediately under the growth plate, nerve processeswere sparse. Farther away from the growth plate, they formed anexpanded network between bone trabeculae, although the inten-sity of the labeling was not homogeneous from one trabecula toanother. In the diaphysis, nerve processes were seen undercortical bone as well as in periosteocytic lacunae; a few nerve
Figure 4. Electron micrographs of rat long bone sections after immu-
nocytochemical labeling for various nerve markers. (a,b,c,d) Immunola-belings of neonatal rat femur (a,c,d) or 15 day-old rat tibia (b) metaph-ysis, followed by biotin streptavidin-gold complex staining. For NF200(a,b), TH (c), and MAP2 (d), gold particles (arrows) are localized innerveprocessesrunninginbonemarrowclosetopreosteoblasts(pOb),orin nerve endings (containing microvesicle: asterisk) in contact withhematopoı ¨eticcell(H).Theinsetin4cpointsoutgoldparticules(arrow).
Bars: 200 nm. (e) Low magnification electron micrograph of a reembed-ded semithin section immunostained for NF200. Positive profiles (ar-rows) contain few organelles and were morphologically similar to thoseobserved on ultrathin sections immunolabeled with gold particles (Fig.4a,b).626 C. M. Serre et al. Bone Vol. 25, No. 6
Glu-containing nerve processes in bone December 1999:623–629
endings were also evident in the center of the diaphysis, in
contact with hematopoı ¨etic cells (Figure 2d).
The distribution of nerve markers was different from those of
type I and III collagens. Immunolabelings for NF200 and type Ior type III collagen, performed on consecutive bone sections,were found to be mutually exclusive. Type I collagen wasvisualized in bone matrix, in osteoblasts, in some stromal cellsprobably preosteoblasts ( Figure 3a), but never in cell processes
immunolabeled for NF200 (Figure 3b). Type III collagen waspresent in the remaining cartilage matrix of the bone trabeculaeand in extracellular collagen fibrils abundant at stromal cellperiphery (Figure 3c), but was not expressed in the network ofcell processes containing NF200 (Figure 3d).
The electron-microscopic analysis, using colloidal gold im-
munolabeling for neuronal markers, confirmed that nerve pro-cesses were expressing NF200 ( Figure 4a,b), TH (Figure 4c),
and MAP2 (Figure 4d). The labeling was abundant in nerveprocesses running in bone marrow and in their widened parts incontact with hematopoı ¨etic cells (Figure 4a) and bone cells
(Figure 4b,c,d). A low magnification electron micrograph of areembedded semithin section immunostained for NF200 (Figure4e) showed that the immunolabeled profiles contained rare or-ganelles and were morphologically similar to those observed onultrathin sections immunostained for NF200 with colloidal gold(Figure 4a,b).
Synaptophysin, one of the major proteins present in synaptic
vesicles, was detected in long bone sections. The tissue distribu-tion of this protein was similar to other nerve markers, but notidentical. Labeling for synaptophysin was more restricted andmainlylocalizedtoshortnervestructuresincontacttobonecells,endothelial, and bone marrow cells ( Figure 5a,b,c). VIP immu-
noreactivity was also found in bone and the tissue distribution ofthis neuropeptide was identical to synaptophysin (Figure 5d).
Figure 5. Immunocytochemical localizations of synaptophysin and VIP
in long bones of growing rats. (a) Metaphysis of neonatal rat femur.Synaptophysin is present in enlargements of nerve processes in contactwith blood vessels (arrows), osteoclasts (asterisk) and hematopoı ¨etic
cells (arrow heads). (b) Diaphysis of 25-day-old rat tibia. Synaptophysinis present in nerve endings (arrow heads) in contact with osteoblastsunderlaying cortical bone (c). Some periosteocytic lacunae contain positiveendings (arrow) in contact with osteocytes. (c) and (d) Consecutive sectionsofneonatalratfemurmetaphysis,nearafferentvessels.Synaptophysin(c)isvisualizedinnerveprocessesclosetohematopoı ¨eticcells(arrows)andinthe
walloftheartery(a)(arrowheads).VIP(d)iscoexpressedinthesamenerveprofiles. Original magnification: 31000.
Figure 6. Immunocytochemical localization of glutamate in long bones
ofgrowingrats.(a)Metaphysisofneonatalrat.Glu(arrows)ispresentinnerve processes running in bone marrow and showing enlargements incontactwithhematopoı ¨eticcells(H).Originalmagnification: 3800.(b,c)
Electron micrographs of 15-day-old rat tibia sections immunolabeled forGlu. Glu (arrows) is observed in nerve processes in the vicinity ofosteoblasts (Ob) as well as in the afferent nerve trunk. S: Schwann cell;A: unmyelinated axon.627 Bone Vol. 25, No. 6 C. M. Serre et al.
December 1999:623–629 Glu-containing nerve processes in bone
Expression of Glutamate in Long Bones of Growing Rats
In the metaphysis and diaphysis of neonatal rat femurs, nerve
processes, running in bone marrow close to bone cells and bloodvessels, contained Glu ( Figure 6a). Immunolabeling for Glu was
particularly abundant in the endosteal part of the metaphysis andwas localized in the same expanded network of thin processespreviously shown to be immunoreactive for nerve markers. Afew other cells, mainly osteoblastic cells, also contained Glu invarying amounts, whereas osteoclasts, endothelial, and hemato-poı¨etic cells were always negative.
In 15- and 25-day-old rat tibia, Glu had also the same tissue
distribution as neuronal markers, highly expressed in nerveprocesses in proximity to blood vessels and bone cells.
The electron microscopic immunocytochemistry analysis
confirmed that Glu was largely present in nerve processes in thevicinity of or in contact with bone cells (Figure 6b), as well as insome axons of the afferent nerve trunk (Figure 6c).
Discussion
The present study has demonstrated the existence, in long bones
of neonatal, 15- and 25-day-old rats, of an extensive network ofcytoplasmic cell processes immunostained for several nervemarkers. NF200 is a general neuronal marker specific of neuro-filaments present in cells and tissues of neuronal origin. Immu-noreactivity for NF200 was found in thin cell processes showingsome dilatations that were not distributed uniformly and weremore numerous when close to blood vessels. To further confirmthe identity of these nerve processes, antibodies directed againstother neuronal markers such as TH, synaptophysin, and MAP2were used. Immunostaining for TH, a commonly acceptedmarker for noradrenergic fibers,
3revealed the occurrence of
sympathetic nerve processes in this network, confirmed by thepresence of VIP-immunoreactive nerve profiles, as shown pre-viously.
19Synaptophysin, a nerve terminal marker, was mainly
demonstrated in varicosities of some short nerve processes gen-erally located in the vicinity of, or in contact with, blood vessels,bone cells, or hematopoı ¨etic cells. MAP2-immunoreactive nerve
processes were also present in rat long bones and could besensory nerve processes because this neuronal marker is primar-ily expressed in the dendrosomatic compartment and excludedfrom the axons of most nerve fibers.
13Our results confirm the
presenceofbothsensoryandsympatheticnervefiberspreviouslydocumented in bone and suggest that these two types of inner-vation may form parallel networks with a close distribution inbone tissue. Immunoreactivities for these specific nerve markerswere only observed in this network of particular cell processesand in well-defined nerve fibers. Stromal cells expressing type Iand III collagens, osteoblastic cells, hematopoı ¨etic cells, endo-
thelial cells, and osteoclasts were always negative for each ofthese neuronal markers, as demonstrated by light andelectron microscopy.
This dense network of thin varicose nerve processes running
with medullary sinusoids deeply in metaphysis and ending incontact with bone cells or medullary cells constitutes a novelobservationnotemphasizedinpreviousstudies.Morphologicallywell-defined unmyelinated and myelinated nerve fibers, as de-scribed previously,
6,28were also observed in 15- and 25-day-old
rat long bone sections, but not in neonatal bones. In contrast, thenetwork of nerve-like processes was already present in neonatalrats and the identification of TH, VIP, and MAP2-immunoreac-tive processes in this network confirmed that rat bone is alreadysupplied at birth with sympathetic and sensory nerve fibers.
32
This localization of nerve processes at proximity to bone and
medullary cells is indicative of a possible role of nerve supply inthe regulation of bone cell activities, in agreement with clinical
observations in patients with neurological disorders and experi-mental denervation studies.
10,11,15However, although some of
these nerve terminals were in contact with bone or bone marrowcells, our electron-microscopic observations did not detect typi-cal synapses in the nerve endings which did not contain manyvesicles.Hara-Irieetal.
14havealsodemonstratedthepresenceof
CGRP-positive nerve fibers in close contact with osteoclasts, atepiphysal trabeculae facing the growth plate of rat femurs; thesestructures were not typical synapses in agreement with our ownfindings.Furtherstudieswillbeneededtoclarifythepresenceofsynaptophysin in bone in the absence of synaptic structures.
The nature of neurotransmitters present in bone has not been
clearlyidentified.Inadditiontonoradrenergicsympatheticnervefibers, various neuropeptides used by either sensory or post-ganglionic sympathetic nerve fibers have been demonstrated inbone, suggesting a possible role for these neuromediators inskeletal metabolism.
19,20,22,23
This is the first study to reveal glutamate-immunoreactive
nerve processes in bone. Glu is the primary excitatory neurome-diator in both the central nervous system and the peripheralnervous system.
26We have shown that Glu was widely ex-
pressed in nerve processes running in bone marrow in thevicinity of bone or bone marrow cells, suggesting that it mightalso act as a neurotransmitter in bone. In addition, Glu wasdetected in some osteoblasts and preosteoblasts, probably inrelation to cell metabolism. Our observations have clearly dem-onstrated some contacts between Glu-immunoreactive nerve ter-minals and bone cells, but no synaptic vesicles were observed inthese structures. Although our study did not show any evidencefor a release of Glu from these nerve terminals, we can considerthat significant local concentrations of Glu might be present inthe vicinity of bone cells.
Glu acts on a variety of different ligand-gated ion cell surface
receptors, classified in two categories, mainly, NMDA receptorsand non-NMDA receptors. These receptors, as well as glutamatetransporters, have been shown to be expressed by bonecells.
7,25,31Furthermore, we have recently demonstrated that
NMDA subtype Glu receptors expressed by osteoclasts arefunctional and that Glu elicits current in these cells.
7,9
The cellular origin of Glu and the mechanisms leading to its
release in bone are unknown. One proposed hypothesis is thatGlu is released from bone cells and has a role in paracrineintercellular communications in bone.
25Another possibility is
that Glu, which is the most largely distributed neuromediator inthe nervous system, is released from nerve fibers present in thevicinity of bone cells. Our results, which demonstrate in longbones of growing rats an extensive network of nerve processescontaining Glu in proximity to bone cells, strengthen this lasthypothesis, and provide initial data for the existence of a gluta-matergic innervation of bone.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank G. Boivin and L.
Malaval for helpful comments on the manuscript. Electron microscopicstudies were performed in the Centre de Microscopie Electronique et dePathologie Ultrastructurale, Faculte ´ de Medecine RTH Lae ¨nnec, Lyon,
France. Part of these results were presented as an abstract at the secondjoint meeting of the American Society For Bone and Mineral Researchand the International Bone and Mineral Society, December 1998, SanFrancisco, CA.
References
1. Arthur, R. P. and Shelley, W. B. The technology of in vitro staining of nerves
in human skin with thiazin dyes. J Invest Dermatol 33:121–144; 1959.628 C. M. Serre et al. Bone Vol. 25, No. 6
Glu-containing nerve processes in bone December 1999:623–629
2. Bjurholm, A., Kreicbergs, A., Brodin, E., and Schultzberg, M. Substance P-
and CGRP-immunoreactive nerves in bone. Peptides 9:165–171; 1988.
3. Bjurholm, A., Kreicbergs, A., Terenius, L., Goldstein, M., and Schultzberg, M.
Neuropeptide Y-, tyrosine hydroxylase- and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-immunoreactive nerves in bone and surrounding tissues. J Auton Nerv Syst25:119–125; 1988.
4. Bjurholm, A., Kreicbergs, A., Schultzberg, M., and Lerner, U. H. Neuroendo-
crine regulation of cyclic AMP formation in osteoblastic cell lines (UMR106-01, ROS 17/2.8, MC3T3-E1 and SAOS-2) and primary bone cells. J BoneMiner Res 7:1011–1019; 1992.
5. Calvo, W. The innervation of the bone marrow in laboratory animals. Am J
Anat 123:315–328; 1968.
6. Calvo, W. and Forteza-Vila, J. On the development of bone marrow innerva-
tion in new-born rats as studied with silver impregnation and electron micros-copy. Am J Anat 126:355–372; 1969.
7. Chenu, C., Serre, C. M., Raynal, C., Burt-Pichat, B., and Delmas, P. D.
Glutamate receptors are expressed by bone cells and are involved in boneresorption. Bone 22:295–299; 1998.
8. Duncan, C. P. and Shim, S. S. The autonomic nerve supply of bone. J Bone Jt
Surg 53:323–330; 1977.
9. Espinosa, L., Itzstein, C., Delmas, P. D., and Chenu, C. Active NMDA
glutamate receptors are expressed by mammalian osteoclasts. J Physiol 518:47–53; 1999.
10. Freehafer, A. A. and Mast, W. A. Lower extremity fractures in patients with
spinal-cord injury. J Bone Jt Surg 47:683–694; 1965.
11. Gillespie, J. A. The nature of bone changes associated with the nerve injuries
and diseases. J Bone Jt Surg 36:464–473; 1963.
12. Goto, T., Yamaza, T., Kido, M. A., and Tanaka, T. Light-and electron
microscopic study of the distribution of axons containing substance P and thelocalization of neurokinin-1 receptor in bone. Cell Tissue Res 293:87–93;1998.
13. Guo, X., Rueger, D., and Higgins, D. Osteogenic protein-1 and related bone
morphogenetic proteins regulate dendritic growth and the expression of micro-tubule-associatedprotein-2inratsympatheticneurons.NeurosciLett245:131–134; 1998.
14. Hara-Irie, F., Amizuka, N., and Ozawa, H. Immunocytochemical and ultra-
structural localization of CGRP-positive nerve fibers at the epiphyseal trab-ecules facing the growth plate of rat femurs. Bone 18:29–39; 1996.
15. Hardy, A. G. and Dickson, J. W. Pathological ossification in traumatic
paraplegia. J Bone Jt Surg 45:76–87; 1963.
16. Hill, E. L. and Elde, R. Calcitonin gene-related peptide-immunoreactive nerve
fibers in mandibular periosteum of rats: Evidence for primary afferent origin.Neurosci Lett 85:172–178; 1988.
17. Hill, E. L. and Elde, R. Distribution of CGRP-, VIP-, D beta H-, SP-, and
NPY-immunoreactive nerves in the periosteum of rats. Cell Tissue Res 264:469–480; 1991.
18. Hill, E. L., Turner, R., and Elde, R. Effects of neonatal sympathectomy and
capsaicin treatment on bone remodelling in rats. Neuroscience 44:747–755;1991.
19. Hohmann, E. L., Elde, R. P., Rysavy, J. A., Einzig, S., and Gebhard, R. L.
Innervation of periosteum and bone by sympathetic vasoactive intestinalpeptide-containing nerve fibers. Science 232:868–871; 1986.
20. Hukkanen, M., Kontinnen, Y. T., Santavirta, S., et al. Rapid proliferation ofCGRP-immunoreactive nerves during healing of rat tibial fracture suggests
neuralinvolvementinbonegrowthandremodeling.Neuroscience54:969–979;1993.
21. Ingram, R. T., Clarke, B. L., Fisher, L. W., and Fitzpatrick, L. A. Distribution
of noncollagenous proteins in the matrix of adult human bone: Evidence ofanatomic and functional heterogeneity. J Bone Miner Res 8:1019–1027; 1993.
22. Konttinen, Y. T., Imai, S., and Suda, A. Neuropeptides and the puzzle of bone
remodeling. Acta Orthop Scand 67:632–639; 1996.
23. Lerner, U. H. Kinins and neuropeptides. In: Bilezikian, J. P., Raisz, L. G., and
Rodan, G. A., Eds. Principles of Bone Biology. San Diego, CA: Academic;1996; 581–596.
24. Linder, J. E. A simple and reliable method for silver impregnation of nerves in
paraffin sections of soft and mineralized tissues. J Anat 127:543–551; 1978.
25. Mason, D. J., Suva, L. J., Genever, P. G., Patton, A. J., Steuckle, S., Hillam,
R. A., and Skerry, T. M. Mechanically regulated expression of a neuralglutamate transporter in bone: A role for excitatory amino acids as osteotropicagents. Bone 20:199–205; 1997.
26. Mayer, M. L. and Westbrook, G. L. The physiology of excitatory amino acids
in the vertebrate central nervous system. Prog Neurobiol 28:197–276; 1987.
27. McKee, M. D., Nanci, A., Landis, W. J., Gotoh, Y., Gerstenfeld, L. C., and
Glimcher, M. J. Effects of fixation and demineralization on the retention ofbone phosphoproteins and other matrix components as evaluated by biochem-icalanalysesandquantitativeimmunocytochemistry.JBoneMinerRes6:937–945; 1991.
28. Milgram, J. W. and Robinson, R. A. An electron microscopic demonstration of
unmyelinated nerves in the haversian canals of the adult dog. Bull John HopkHosp 117:163–173; 1965.
29. Miller,M.R.andKasahara,M.Observationsontheinnervationofhumanlong
bones. Anat Rec 145:13–23; 1963.
30. Neiss, W. F. Electron staining of the cell surface coat by osmium-low
ferrocyanide. Histochemistry 80:231–242; 1984.
31. Patton, A. J., Genever, P. G., Birch, M. A., Suva, L. J., and Skerry, T. M.
Expression of an N-Methyl-D-Aspartate-type receptor by human and ratosteoblasts and osteoclasts suggests a novel glutamate signaling pathway inbone. Bone 22:645–649; 1998.
32. Sisask, G., Bjurholm, A., Ahmed, M., and Kreicbergs, A. The development of
autonomic innervation in bone and joints of the rat. J Auton Nerv Syst59:27–33; 1996.
33. Tabarowski, Z., Gibson-Berry, K., and Felten, S. Y. Noradrenergic and pepti-
dergic innervation of the mouse femur bone marrow. Acta Histochem (Jena)98:453–457; 1996.
34. Thurston, T. J. Distribution of nerves in long bones as shown by silver
impregnation. J Anat 134:719–728; 1982.
35. Warshawsky,H.andMoore,G.Atechniqueforthefixationanddecalcification
oftheratincisorsforelectronmicroscopy.JHistochemCytochem15:542–549;1967.
Date Received: December 1, 1998
Date Revised: August 2, 1999
Date Accepted: August 3, 1999629 Bone Vol. 25, No. 6 C. M. Serre et al.
December 1999:623–629 Glu-containing nerve processes in bone
