Growth Hormone Increases Vertebral and Femoral Bone
Strength in Osteopenic, Ovariectomized, Aged Rats in aDose-Dependent and Site-Speciﬁc Manner
Li. MOSEKILDE,1J. S. THOMSEN,1P. B. ORHII,2and D. N. KALU2
1Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Anatomy, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark
2Department of Physiology, The University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA
The aim of the study was to assess the effect of growthhormone (GH) as restorative therapy in an aged, ovariecto-mized rat model with established osteopenia. The study wasplanned as a dose-response study, and four different skeletalsites were investigated by mechanical testing and measure-ments of bone mass and dimensions. Twelve-month-old vir-ginF344ratsweredividedintoeightgroupswithtenanimalsper group: (1) sham operated (sham); (2) ovariectomized(ovx);(3)sham 1solventvehicle(sv);(4)ovx 1sv;(5)ovx 1
GH 50 mg/kg body weight/day; (6) ovx 1GH 1.25 mg/kg
body weight/day; (7) ovx 1GH 2.5 mg/kg body weight/day;
and (8) ovx 1GH 5.0 mg/kg body weight/day. Groups 1 and
2 were killed after 3 months to establish that bone loss hadoccurred due to ovx. One month later, the remaining groupsbegan3monthsoftreatment,attheendofwhichtheanimalswere also killed. The effects of ovariectomy (ovx) and GHtherapy were measured at four skeletal sites: lumbar verte-brae; femoral diaphysis; femoral neck; and distal femoralmetaphysis. Ovariectomy induced a significant loss of bonestrengthatallsitesapartfromthefemoralneck.Thelosswasmost pronounced at the distal femoral metaphysis. GH wasable to reverse the ovx-induced loss of strength at the verte-bral site in a dose-dependent manner. At the femoral diaph-yseal site, GH not only reversed the ovx-induced changes butincreased load values significantly above sham level. How-ever,atthedistalfemoralmetaphysis,whichisdominatedbycancellous bone, only partial reversal was seen after GHtreatment. The lowest GH dose had no significant effect atany site tested. We conclude that GH treatment can reestab-lish vertebral bone loss due to ovariectomy in a dose-depen-dent manner. The restorative effect is only partial at thedistal femoral metaphysis even at a high dose. At skeletalsites with less pronounced ovx-induced bone loss (femoralneck and diaphysis), GH treatment increased bone strengthto sham level or above sham level. Therefore, the effect ofovariectomy is dependent upon the skeletal site investigated,and the effect of GH treatment is dependent on both theskeletal site and the size of the ovx-induced bone loss at thissite. (Bone 23:343–352; 1998) © 1998 by Elsevier ScienceInc. All rights reserved.Key Words: Rat model; Ovariectomy; Osteopenia; Growth
hormone; Bone mass; Bone strength.
Introduction
Three bone anabolic agents are currently available: PTH, fluo-
ride, and growth hormone (GH). The first two agents have beenextensively tested in different animal models. PTH has beenshown in rat models to increase cancellous and cortical bonemass.
12,13,18,19,22,23,44,52,53These increases in bone mass have
been followed by a concomitant increase in bone strength at allskeletal sites tested.
21,28,30,33,34,42,43In large animal models
(dogs),38,55PTH has been shown to increase bone mass when
given intermittently.
On the other hand, several animal studies on the effect of
fluoride have shown a discrepancy between the measured effecton bone mass and the resultant changes in bone strength. Thisdiscrepancy has been found in both small animal studies (rats,rabbits)
41,42,48,49and in studies with larger animals (mini-
pigs).20,32Thereasonforthisadverseeffectoffluoridetreatment
on bone material quality has yet to be determined.
The third anabolic agent, GH, is not bone specific, and
although the effects of GH on wound healing and fracturehealing
4,16,27have been investigated extensively, only a few
studies have focused on the effect of GH for reversal of osteope-nia. However, in 1994, Eschen and Andreassen showed that GHtreatment as monotherapy or in combination with estrogen andgestagencould“normalize”vertebralstrengthinovariectomized,lactating, and calcium-deficent rats.
8No other skeletal sites were
investigated in their study. Concomitantly, a study investigatingthe effect of GH in aged male rats was performed. This study,which was split into two parts, showed: (1) GH increasedvertebral body strength through an increase in vertebral corticalbone mass, without having any effect on cancellous bone
2; and
(2) GH increased femoral cortical bone mass and strength,mainly through periosteal apposition.
1
Recently, GH was shown capable of maintaining vertebral
bodystrengthwhengiventoovxratseitherasmonotherapyorincombination therapy with estrogen or with IGF-I.
51
However, none of these studies was designed as a dose-
response study, and the only skeletal sites investigated to datehave been the vertebral bodies and the femoral cortical bone.
Theaimsofthepresentstudywere:(1)todeterminetheeffect
of ovariectomy in an aged rat model at four different skeletalsites: vertebrae, femoral diaphysis, femoral neck, and distalfemoral metaphysis; (2) to determine the effect of GH on bone
Address for correspondence and reprints: Lis Mosekilde, M.D., Depart-
ment of Cell Biology, Institute of Anatomy, University of Aarhus,DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark. E-mail: lm@ana.au.dk
Bone Vol. 23, No. 4
October 1998:343–352
343 © 1998 by Elsevier Science Inc. 8756-3282/98/$19.00
All rights reserved. PII S8756-3282(98)00107-0
mass and strength at these four skeletal sites in the aged ovx rat
model; and (3) to assess the effect of GH in a dose-responsedesigned study.
Materials and Methods
AnimalsEleven-month-oldvirginF344ratswerepurchasedfromtheNIA
agedrodentcolonyatHarlanSpragueDawley(Indianapolis,IN).The animals were housed three per cage in a pathogen-freefacilityinroomsmaintainedat26°Cand14hlightand10hdarkcycles. During the experimental period, the animals were fedTeklad rat chow (Madison, WI) that contained 0.93% calcium,0.65% phosphorus, and 3.0 units of vitamin D per gram. Theanimals were allowed free access to drinking water. When theanimals reached 12 months of age, they were divided into thefollowingeightweight-matchedgroupsoftenanimalspergroup:
1. Sham operated (sham, 0 weeks [0W]).
2. Ovariectomized (ovx, 0W).3. Sham 1solvent vehicle (sv) for GH (sham, 12W).
4. ovx 1sv (ovx, 12W).
5. ovx 1GH50 mg/kgbodyweight/day(ovx,GH50 mg,12W).
6. ovx 1GH 1.25 mg/kg body weight/day (ovx, GH 1.25 mg,
12W).
7. ovx 1GH 2.5 mg/kg body weight/day (ovx, GH 2.5 mg,
12W).
8. ovx 1GH 5.0 mg/kg body weight/day (ovx, GH 5.0 mg,
12W).
Theanimalswereweighedoncepermonthduringthestudy.Rats
in groups 1 and 3 were sham operated (sham); group 2 andgroups 4–8 were ovariectomized (ovx). Three months aftersurgery, at timepoint 0 weeks, group 1 (sham) and group 2 (ovx)rats were killed and their bones analyzed to establish that boneloss had occurred before initiating therapy in groups 3–8. Be-cause this analysis (volumetric density and histomorphometry)took about 1 month to carry out, hormone and solvent vehicles(sv) injections were initiated at the beginning of month 4 aftersurgery. Therapy was continued for 3 months, at the end ofwhichtheanimalswerekilled.FourdosesofrecombinanthumanGH (Genentech, South San Francisco, CA) were studied. Thelowest dose (group 5) was selected because it is in the range ofdosesusedinGHtherapyinhumans.
23Thehigherdoses(groups
6–8) were based on previous studies in rats.4Injections were
given twice daily, one between 8:00 and 9:00 A.M. and the other
between 4:00 and 5:00 P.M. This regimen has been reported to be
more effective than single daily injections.4Tetracycline (15
mg/kg body weight) and demeclocycline (15 mg/kg bodyweight) were injected 14 and 4 days before killing. (Data ondynamic histomorphometry are not presented in this work.) Atthe termination of the study, the animals were bled from theabdominal aorta, and serum was separated and stored at 220°C.
The femora and lumbar vertebrae were dissected out, cleaned ofsoft tissue and stored in wet gauze at 220°C for later analysis.
All surgery and bleeding of animals were done under methoxy-flurane anesthesia. The animals were treated in accordance withthe guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Com-mittee of Texas University and the NIH Guide for the Care and
Use of Laboratory Animals .
The right femur and lumbar vertebrae L-2 were packed with
blue ice and sent from the University of Texas, San Antonio tothe University of Aarhus for mechanical testing.Preparation and Biomechanical Testing of the Second Lumbar
Vertebrae (L-2)
From each rat, lumbar vertebra L-2 was mounted on a wooden
block using super-glue. This wooden block was then fixed in theholder of a diamond precision-parallel saw (Exakt, Apparatebau,Otto Hermann, Norderstedt, Germany). A central specimen withplanoparallel ends and a height of approximately 3.9 mm wasobtainedfromeachvertebra.Allremainingpartsoftheprocesseswere then removed using a fine electric saw. The volume of thevertebral body cylinder was estimated by weighing the bonespecimens before and during immersion in water (Mettler AG245, Mettler-Toledo, Na ¨nikon-Greifensee, Switzerland, equip-
ped to measure volumes), and the length was measured by use ofan electronic caliper. The average cross-sectional area of eachspecimen was obtained by dividing the volume by the height.The bone specimens were kept in Ringer solution until testing,and removal of the bone marrow was not performed beforetesting.
29,34
The vertebral body cylinders were tested along the proximo-
distal axis in a materials-testing machine (Alwetron TCT5,Lorentzen and Wettre, Stockholm, Sweden) at a nominal defor-mationrateof2mm/min.Duringcompression,load-deformationcurves were recorded and subsequently analyzed in a CompaqProLinea 4/33 computer with a computer program speciallydeveloped for analysis of biomechanical parameters by one ofthe present investigators (J.S.T.).
21After biomechanical testing,
thespecimenswereashed(105°Cfo r2hand580°Cfor24h)and
the ash content was expressed as milligrams of ash per cubicmillimeter of specimen volume (ash density).
Data presented included:
Maximum load, F
max(N). This was achieved directly from the
load-deformation curves and expressed in newtons (N). Thisrepresents the maximum load applied at fracture of thespecimen.
Ash density ,r(mg/mm
3). The ash weight divided by the total
tissue volume (bone 1marrow).
Stress,smax(MPa).Theultimatestressonthestress-straincurve.
Young’s modulus, E (GPa). The ultimate slope on the stress-
strain curve.
Preparation of Femoral Cortical Bone for Three-Point
Bending Test and Measurement of Dimensions
The femora were placed in a testing jig constructed for a
three-point bending test. The distance between the supportingrods was fixed at 15.7 mm. Load was applied at a constantdeformation rate of 2 mm/min with a rod at the upper anteriormidpoint of the femur. Load-deformation curves were recordedon-line for later analysis.
After biomechanical testing, a 200- mm-thick section was
obtained as closely as possible to the fracture site by use of thediamond precision-parallel saw. The sections were marked witha pen to identify their orientation and placed in a drop of Ringersolution (to prevent drying out) directly on an Olympus SZ-40stereomicroscope. The sections were illuminated from under-neath. A low magnification (of 315–20) was used, allowing the
whole section to fill out the field of view as much as possible. APanasonic CCD video camera was attached to the microscopeandconnectedtoanIntel80486-basedpersonalcomputer(PC)inwhich a LifeView frame-grabber card (Animation Technology,Taiwan) was mounted. The imaging capturing software wasIP
HOTOPLUS(U-Lead Systems, Taipei, Taiwan) that runs under
MS W INDOWS3.1.
The images were captured as gray-scale images at a resolu-344 Li. Mosekilde et al. Bone Vol. 23, No. 4
GH increases bone strength in aged ovx rats October 1998:343–352
tion of 640 3480 pixels with a depth of 8 bits (256 gray levels).
They were transformed into black-and-white images (1 bit im-ages) through threshold filtering. The images were stored in thetagged image file format (TIFF) for later analysis. A specialcircular metal object (a reference) with a known area was alsoscanned at the same magnification as the sections. This enabledmeasurementsinabsolutecoordinates.Acustom-madecomputerprogramwascreatedtoperformthehistomorphometricmeasure-ments of bone dimensions. The program was written in C andcompiled with a 32 bit GNU-C compiler (Free Software Foun-dation, Cambridge, MA) and runs under the MS-DOS operatingsystem in protected mode with a DOS extender.
45
The bone area was computed by counting the number of
pixels in the region of interest (ROI) that represent bone tissueand the marrow area by counting the number of pixels thatrepresent marrow space. The tissue area is then calculated bysummingthenumberofpixelsrepresentingboneandthenumberof pixels representing marrow space (i.e., the total number ofpixels in the ROI).
From these 200- mm-thick, nonembedded sections, data were
calculated for bone area (mm
2), marrow area (mm2), and tissue
area (mm2).
The axial moment of inertia ( IX) and the other geometrical
properties needed for the calculation of stress were also obtainedfrom these 200 mm sections by use of the same computer
software. I
Xis the axial moment of inertia around the M-L axis
of bending which contains the center of mass of the 200- mm-
thick section. This axis undergoes no compressive or tensilestresses during the bending test.
47The upper side of the bone
specimen was marked with a permanent marker pen beforebending to ensure correct orientation of the 200 mm section.
Calculations were performed in accordance with the guidelinesof Turner and Burr.
47The following parameters were presented
for three-point bending: maximal load, Fmax(N); axial moment
of inertia, IX(mm4); stress, smax(MPa); and Young’s modulus,
E(GPa).
Ashing was not performed, as the remaining parts were used
for fixation of the metaphyses during further preparation andtesting.
Preparation and Biomechanical Testing of Femoral Necks
On the day of testing, the proximal femur was slowly thawed at
roomtemperature.ThespecimenswereplacedinRingersolutionfor 1 h before mounting in a device for standardized fixation.
40
The fixation device holding the specimen was then placed in
the materials testing machine, and a vertical load conducted by abrass cylinder was applied to the top of the femoral head. Thecylinderwasdirectedparalleltotheaxisofthefemoraldiaphysisand moved at a constant rate of 2 mm/min until fracture of thefemoral neck.
During compression, load-deformation values were obtained,
stored on-line, and later analyzed by computer. Data presented:maximum load, F
max(N).
Distal Femoral Metaphysis
A 4-mm-thick section with planoparallel ends was sawed from
the distal part of the femora just over the patellofemoral jointcartilage. The section volumes were measured.
The distal femoral sections were tested along the proximo-
distal axis by the materials-testing machine. The procedure, datacollection, and analysis were identical to those for the vertebralbodies. After biomechanical testing, the specimens were ashed.Data included: maximum load, F
max(N); ash density, r(mg/
mm3); stress, smax(MPa); and Young’s modulus, E(GPa).Statistical Analysis
Data were not normally distributed. Differences between all
groups were evaluated by Kruskal–Wallis test, including a mul-tiple comparison procedure.
7Differences were considered sig-
nificant at p,0.05. The results are presented as mean 6SD.
Results
VertebraeEffect of ovx and aging (Figure 1 A–D). At timepoint 0W, a
significant difference of 25% was found between load values forsham and ovx. A similar significant difference (18%) was foundbetween ash density for sham (0W) and ovx (0W). Thesedifferences were maintained in the animals tested at timepoint12W (sham and ovx). There were no age-related differencesbetweentimepoints0Wand12Wforeithershamorovxanimals.Asimilarpatternwasseeninregardtothederivedbiomechanicaldata (stress and Young’s modulus).
Dose-dependent effect of GH . There was no significant effect
ofthelowestdoseofGH(0.05mg)onbiomechanicalparametersor ash density when compared with ovx (12W). The threehigh-GH-dose groups all had biomechanical properties signifi-cantly higher than ovx (12W); there was a clear dose response.Although the two highest dose groups seemed to have load,stress, and modulus values higher than sham (12W), this differ-ence did not become significant.
Femoral Diaphysis
Bone area, marrow area, and tissue area (Figure 2A–C).Effect
of ovx and aging . At timepoint 0W there were no differences
between sham and ovx animals concerning bone area and tissuearea. Marrow area was significantly higher in ovx (0W) than insham (0W), indicating an ovx-induced endosteal resorption. Attimepoint 12W, the ovx (12W) animals had significantly lowerbone area than the sham (12W) animals. Also, at this timepoint,marrow area was significantly larger for ovx (12W) than forsham (12W). There were no differences between tissue areas,indicating that ovx had no significant effect on the periostealapposition. There were no age-related differences between time-points 0W and 12W for either sham or ovx animals.
Dose-dependent effect of GH treatment . The lowest GH dose
(0.05 mg/kg) had no significant effect on any of the parametersmeasured when compared with ovx (12W). There was, however,aclearGHdoseresponseconcerningbonearea(whichincreasedsignificantly above sham level) and also tissue area (which alsoincreased significantly above sham level), indicating a pro-nounced effect of GH on the periosteal envelope. GH treatmenthadnosignificanteffectonmarrowareaeveninthehighestdose.
Three-pointbendingofthefemoraldiaphysis (Figure3A–D).
Effect of ovx and aging . At timepoint 0W, ovx animals had
significantly lower load values and Young’s modulus than sham.There were no significant differences concerning axial momentof inertia or stress. At timepoint 12W, there were no significantdifferences between ovx and sham concerning any of the fourmeasured parameters (load, axial moment of inertia, stress, andYoung’s modulus). There were no age-related changes for eithersham or ovx animals.
Dose-dependent effect of GH . The lowest GH dose had no
significant effect on any of the parameters measured. The higherGH doses showed a clear dose-response pattern concerning loadvalues and also axial moment of inertia. At both parameters, aplateau seemed to have been reached with the highest GH dose.This plateau was significantly higher than sham level. There was345 Bone Vol. 23, No. 4 Li. Mosekilde et al.
October 1998:343–352 GH increases bone strength in aged ovx rats
no significant effect of GH on stress values. However, in the
three high-GH-treatment groups, Young’s modulus was signifi-cantly lower than in either sham or ovx. This might indicate arapid formation of bone with low mineralization.
Distal Femoral Metaphysis
Effect of ovx and of aging (Figure 4 A–D). At timepoint 0W,
there was a significant negative effect of ovx compared withsham, both concerning load values ( 224%) and also ash density
(215%). A similar pattern was seen concerning stress and
Young’s modulus. At timepoint (12W) a very significant nega-tive effect of ovx on load ( 233%) and ash density ( 220%) was
seen, as was the negative effect on stress and modulus. Therewere no age-related changes for either sham or ovx animals.
Dose-dependent effect of GH . The lowest GH dose had no
significant effect on either biomechanical data or ash density.The three highest GH doses were all able to increase load valuessignificantly over ovx (12W), but not up to sham (12W) level.GH2.5mg/dayseemedtohavethegreatesteffectonloadvalues,butthisvaluewasstillsignificantlylowerthansham(12W).Thisclearly showed that, at the metaphyseal site, GH was unable to
restore completely bone lost due to ovx.
GH treatment had no significant effect on bone ash density,
stress, or modulus in any of the doses given.
Femoral Neck
Effect of ovx and of aging (Figure 5). There were no significant
differences between load values for ovx and sham at timepoint0W or at timepoint 12W. There were no age-related changes inload values at the femoral neck site for either sham or ovxanimals.
Dose-dependent effect of GH . The lowest GH dose had no
significant effect on load values. The three highest GH dosesincreased load values significantly to over ovx (12W) levels.
Site-Specific Normalized Load Spectrum
To assess the site-specific effect of ovx on load values, the ovx
(12W) load values were normalized with sham (12W) loadvalues(Figure6A).Inthisfigure,thehorizontallinethrough1.0
Figure 1. Load values (A); ash densities (B); stress (C); and Young’s modulus (D) from the second lumbar vertebral body (L2). Sham animals (BSL,
SHM) and ovariectomized rats (BSL, OVX) were killed before the beginning of treatment (vertical line at timepoint 0W), but 3 months after surgery.Sham animals (SHM) were treated for 12 weeks with solvent vehicle (sv), or ovariectomized rats were treated for 12 weeks with sv (OVX), GH 0.05mg/kg per day (GH 0.05), GH 1.25 mg/kg per day (GH 2.5 mg), or GH 5.0 mg/kg per day (GH 5.0 mg).
aSignificantly different from sham (0W);
bsignificantly different from sham (12W);csignificantly different from OVX (12W).346 Li. Mosekilde et al. Bone Vol. 23, No. 4
GH increases bone strength in aged ovx rats October 1998:343–352
represents the level at which ovx and sham values are identical.
The percentage decline in ovx load values compared with shamis indicated.
Figure 6B illustrates the site-specific normalized load spec-trum for GH treatment compared with ovx. In Figure 6B,C the
GH dose used for comparison is GH 2.5 mg/kg per day. (Thereason for choosing this dose is that it seemed to have the mostpositive effect on bone strength at the four skeletal sites tested.)All values .1.0 represent load values that are higher than ovx.
The percentage increase compared with ovx is indicated.
Figure 6C illustrates the site-specific normalized load spec-
trum for GH treatment compared with sham. The GH dose isagain 2.5 mg/kg per day. In this group, all values .1.0 are gains
compared with sham. The percentage change (increase or de-cline) compared with sham is indicated.
Discussion
The presented study has shown that GH treatment given to aged,
osteopenic, ovx rats has a highly anabolic effect—with a cleardose-response pattern. But, the study has also shown that theeffect of both ovariectomy and GH treatment is dependent uponthe skeletal site investigated.
With regard to the FDA guidelines for preclinical osteoporo-
sis research,
11biomechanical investigation of only two sites is
required: (1) the vertebral bodies (compression test); and (2) thefemoral cortical bone (three-point bending test). However, thefemoral neck site is, from a clinical point of view, very impor-tant. And, including this site as a general test site has previouslybeen suggested.
25Additionally, as the proximal tibial or the
distal femoral metaphysis are the sites of choice concerningassessment of dynamic and static histomorphometric changesdue to ovx and treatment regimes,
17one of these sites was also
considered to merit mechanical assessment.35,53Recently, these
sites have also attracted considerable interest concerning longi-tudinal measurements of bone changes by use of pQCT.
9,10
The present study disclosed that there is a very different
response to ovx at the four sites investigated. The largest re-sponse was seen at the metaphyseal site, with a 33% decline inload values compared with sham. At the vertebral body site, thedecline was 25%. The decline was significant at both these sites.However,atthefemoralnecksite,thedeclinewasonly12%,andat the femoral diaphyseal site a loss of only 6% was seen—thesetwo sites did not disclose any significant effect of ovx on bonestrength. That no significant effect of ovx was found at skeletalsites dominated by cortical bone is in accordance with previousobservations,
33,40and is probably due to the lack of intracortical
bone remodeling seen in both young and old rats.32,53
The study also disclosed that not only is the effect of ovx
dependentonskeletalsite—butsoistheeffectofGH.Intheovxanimals,GH(2.5mg/kgperday)wasabletoincreaseloadvaluesby47%overovxlevelatthevertebralbodysite,butbyonly26%over ovx level at the distal metaphysis. The measured increasesin strength were significant at all four sites.
When GH treatment was compared with sham animals, the
largest effect was disclosed at the femoral diaphyseal site, with asignificant increase of 25%. The effects on vertebrae (11%) andon femoral neck (16%) did not become significant. Importantly,at the femoral metaphysis, GH was not able to restore bonestrength to sham level ( 215%). The most likely reason for the
inability of GH to restore bone strength at this site is the loss ofthe bony template, which is necessary for the formation process.It should be noted that PTH treatment shows a similar patternwhen studied by use of pQCT or histomorphometry.
10,39
In this part of the study, dynamic histomorphometry was not
performed, but static histomorphometry was used to assess theeffect of both ovx and GH on the endosteal and periostealenvelopes of the diaphysis. Static histomorphometry clearlyshowed that ovx had a pronounced effect on the endostealenvelope, leading to significantly increased marrow cavity and
Figure 2. Dimensions of midfemoral diaphysis. Bone area (A), marrow
area (B), and tissue area (C) (see legend to Figure 1).aSignificantly
different from sham (0W);bsignificantly different from sham (12W);
csignificantly different from OVX (12W).347 Bone Vol. 23, No. 4 Li. Mosekilde et al.
October 1998:343–352 GH increases bone strength in aged ovx rats
thereby later also to a reduced bone area. Ovariectomy had no
effectontheperiostealenvelopeinthisstudywithagedrats.GH,on the other hand, had a very pronounced effect on the periostealenvelope, leading to increased bone area and tissue area. Noeffect was disclosed at the endosteal surface, and GH seemedunable to reduce the size of the marrow cavity. These findingsare in accordance with those of Andreassen et al.
1and Orhii et
al.36
The effect of GH on the periosteal surface also led to an
increaseintheaxialmomentofinertiaandtherebysecondarilytothe very pronounced increase in strength (three-point bendingload).
It should be noted that, in the present study, GH at lowest
dose(0.05mg/kg)hadnosignificanteffectonbonemassorbonestrength at any of the sites tested. This dose was chosen as itcorresponds to the dose given in human studies.
24That this dose
showed no significant effect in rats could be due to the fact thatthe GH used was from a different species (human). However,given that there is no species difference in the sensitivity towardhGH between rats and humans, this rat study indicates that dosesused for GH treatment in patients with short stature might not beanabolic for bone in the human adult skeleton.
Furthermore, the present study showed that there was a cleardose-response pattern with the four selected GH doses—al-
though at some sites a plateau seemed to be reached at a doselevelof2.5mg/kg.Thisplateauwasespeciallypronouncedatthefemoral diaphyseal site and the distal femoral metaphysis. How-ever, there was no plateau at the vertebral body site or at thefemoral neck. The GH-induced increases in femoral neckstrengthcouldbearesultofGH-inducedperiostealapposition,asallthefractureswereproducedatalocationwithperiostealcoverjustoutsidethecapsularinsertionofthehipjoint.Itisdifficulttodeduce whether GH treatment would be able to increase strengthat the site of intracapsular, cervical fractures, as this site has noperiosteal tissue.
26It should be noted that ovariectomy induced
no significant decrease in femoral neck strength, and no differ-ence between femoral neck load was disclosed between ovx andsham animals at timepoints 0W or 12W. This is in accordancewith several other studies using aged rats
3or a relatively short
observation period.43
GH seemed to change the elasticity of the formed bone. This
was especially pronounced with regard to the femoral diaphysis,where GH treatment led to an increase in load, no change instress, but to a decrease in Young’s modulus. As the main effectof GH treatment seems to be a stimulation of bone formation onthe periosteal envelope—with no, or minor, effect on the cortical
Figure 3. Diaphyseal biomechanical data (three-point bending). Load values (A), axial moment of inertia (B); stress values (C); and Young’s modulus
(D) (see legend to Figure 1).aSignificantly different from sham (0W);bsignificantly different from sham (12W);csignificantly different from OVX
(12W).348 Li. Mosekilde et al. Bone Vol. 23, No. 4
GH increases bone strength in aged ovx rats October 1998:343–352
endosteal envelope, these changes in biomechanical properties
could be explained by the very rapid formation of new, not yetfully mineralized bone subperiosteally.
Specificperiostealreactionsarealsoseenasaconsequenceof
loading,
37and exercise has a proven positive effect on bone
strength.31,40,50It is therefore tempting to combine these two
treatment schedules: GH and exercise. However, in the study byYehetal.,
54theinvestigatorsconcludedthatlong-termtreatment
with low-dose ovine GH administration did not enhance theincrease in bone mass from exercise. Therefore, low-dose GH(0.5 mg/kg) did not seem to be able to potentiate the effect ofexercise on long bones in their study. However, the selected GHdose might have been too low to exert an anabolic effect.
PTH is a very powerful anabolic agent in rat studies also.
However, whereas GH exerts its main effect on the periostealsurface, PTH has a very pronounced effect on both the endostealand periosteal surfaces.
10This is reflected in an increase in
trabecular bone volume and a decrease in marrow cavity, plus anincrease in bone sizes during PTH treatment (for overview, seeMosekilde
26).
After withdrawal of PTH treatment given at a high dose, or
for a longer period, bone mass seems to be lost from theendosteal surface—but what has been gained on the periostealsurface is retained.
46Therefore, the effect of GH on bone mass
and strength (which is primarily due to periosteal apposition)might well also be retained after withdrawal of treatment. How-
ever, this requires further investigation.
In humans, osteoporotic changes are characterized by cortical
thinning and loss of trabecular bone volume and connectivity.26
Logically, PTH, which acts on all envelopes,34is therefore the
anabolic agent of choice. However, the advantage of GH is thatthe very pronounced effect on periosteal apposition has a rela-tively large impact in biomechanical terms, and that the perios-teally gained bone seems to be easily retainable. In humanstudies with short-term GH treatment, no effect on BMD mea-surementshasbeendetected,despiteaverylong-termincreaseinserum osteocalcin.
5,6This might well be explained by the main
effect of GH being on the periosteal envelope, with a directstimulation of osteoblasts over large surfaces (modeling) and aminor concomitant effect on bone remodeling (inducing in-creased activation frequency, leading to an increase in remodel-ing space). The GH-induced periosteal apposition would lead toan increase in the moment of inertia (and thereby of bonestrength) without any DEXA or pQCT scanner being able todetect the apposition. The GH-induced increase in remodelingspace (cancellous and intracortical) may mask any small bonegain at the periosteal surface, at least to the view of a DEXAscanner. Finally, as mentioned earlier, the doses used in humantreatment protocols might not be anabolic in the adult skeleton.
Thedifferentsitestestedinthisstudyallexhibitdifferentload
Figure 4. Distal femoral metaphysis biomechanical data. Load values (A), ash densities (B), stress (C), and Young’s modulus (D) (see legend to Figure 1).349 Bone Vol. 23, No. 4 Li. Mosekilde et al.
October 1998:343–352 GH increases bone strength in aged ovx rats
patterns. The four sites also differ concerning their ratios of
cortical and trabecular bone. Although the middiaphyseal sitecontains almost 100% cortical bone, pure trabecular bone, whichis the other end of the spectrum, is not represented. Optimally,mechanical testing of pure trabecular bone should also be per-formed—butforphysicalreasons,obtainingspecimensfulfillingthe requirements for “assumptions of continuum behaviour”
14is
not possible in small animals (and indentation tests and penetra-tion tests are not recommended).
15
It should be noted that the quadrupedal rat experiences a
loading at all of the four test sites described, which is differentfrom the load pattern in humans, and that the remodeling patternis also different. For these reasons, extrapolation of the data tohumans should be undertaken with caution.
On the other hand, it should be stressed that the aged,
osteopenic, ovariectomized rat model has many advantages overthe younger rat models: (1) there is a stability of the boneparameters in rats of this age over a long period of investigation(no confounding factors); and (2) there is no, or very little,periosteal drift, such as that observed in young, growing ovxrats.
17Such an ovx-induced periosteal drift can distort some of
the biomechanical tests.
In conclusion, the study has extended the knowledge of
ovx-induced changes concerning bone strength so that it nowincludes the distal femoral metaphysis—one of the sites nor-mally used for histomorphometry or pQCT measurements insmall animal studies. Thereby, it has been possible, for the firsttime, to describe the relative ovx-induced strength changes atfour different skeletal sites. Furthermore, the dose response ofGH could be described at these four skeletal sites. Although thelowest GH dose given had no significant effect in this study,there was a clear GH dose-response pattern. GH was able toreverse loss of bone strength due to ovx and to restore it to shamlevel at the vertebral and femoral neck sites and to above shamlevel at the femoral diaphysis. However, at the distal femoralmetaphysis, GH was unable to restore ovx-induced loss of bonestrength to sham level.
Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful for the excellent technical
assistance of Birthe Gylling-Jørgensen, Department of Cell Biology,Institute of Anatomy, University of Aarhus. Michael Hewitt is gratefullyacknowledged for his help in revising the manuscript. This study was
supported in part by a grant from NIH (No. AG13309) and a universitygrant program for osteoporosis from Procter and Gamble Pharmaceuti-cals (Cincinnati, OH) and the Danish Medical Research Council (No.
Figure 5. Femoral neck compression test. Load values (see legend to
Figure 1).aSignificantly different from sham (0W);bsignificantly differ-
ent from sham (12W);csignificantly different from OVX (12W).
Figure 6. Site-specific load spectrum. Site-specific effect of OVX com-
pared with sham (A). Site-specific effect of GH (2.5 mg) compared withOVX (B). Site-specific effect of GH (2.5 mg) compared with sham (C).Percentage change indicated.350 Li. Mosekilde et al. Bone Vol. 23, No. 4
GH increases bone strength in aged ovx rats October 1998:343–352
9503020). We thank Genentech, Inc. (South San Francisco, CA) for
providing the recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) used in thisstudy.
References
1. Andreassen, T. T., Jørgensen, P. H., Flyvbjerg, A., Ørskov, H., and Oxlund, H.
Growth hormone stimulates bone formation and strength of cortical bone inaged rats. J Bone Miner Res 10:1057–1067; 1995.
2. Andreassen, T. T., Melsen, F., and Oxlund, H. The influence of growth
hormone on cancellous and cortical bone of the vertebral body in aged rats.J Bone Miner Res 11:1094–1102; 1996.
3. Bagi, C. M., Ammann, P., Rizzoli, R., and Miller, S. C. Effect of estrogen
deficiencyoncancellousandcorticalbonestructureandstrengthofthefemoralneck in rats. Calcif Tissue Int 61:336–344; 1997.
4. Bak, B., Jørgensen, P. H., and Andreassen, T. T. Dose response of growth
hormone on fracture healing in the rat. Acta Orthop Scand 61:54–57; 1990.
5. Brixen, K., Kassem, M., Nielsen, H. K., Loft, A. G., Flyvbjerg, A., and
Mosekilde, Le. Short-term treatment with growth hormone stimulates osteo-blastic and osteoclastic activity in osteopenic postmenopausal women: A doseresponse study. J Bone Miner Res 10:1865–1874; 1995.
6. Brixen,K.,Nielsen,H.K.,Mosekilde,Le.,andFlyvbjerg,A.Ashortcourseof
recombinant human growth hormone treatment stimulates osteoblasts andactivatesboneremodellinginhumanvolunteers.JBoneMinerRes5:609–618;1990.
7. Conover, W. J. Practical Nonparametric Statistics. New York: Wiley; 1980;
229–237.
8. Eschen, C. and Andreassen, T. T. Growth hormone normalizes vertebral
strength on ovariectomized rats. Calcif Tissue Int 57:392–396; 1995.
9. Gasser, J. A. Assessing bone quality by pQCT. Bone 17(Suppl.):145S–154S;
1995.
10. Gasser, J. A. Quantitative assessment of bone mass and geometry by pQCT in
rats in vivo and site specificity of changes at different skeletal sites. J Jpn SocBone Morphol 7:107–114; 1997.
11. Guidelines for Preclinical and Clinical Evaluation of Agents Used in the
PreventionorTreatmentofPostmenopausalOsteoporosis(Draft).Washington,DC: Division of Metabolism and Endocrine Drug Products, Food and DrugAdministration, April 1994.
12. Gunness-Hey, M. and Hock, J. M. Increased trabecular bone mass in rats
treated with human synthetic parathyroid hormone. Metab Bone Dis Rel Res5:177–181; 1984.
13. Gunness-Hey, M. and Hock, J. M. Loss of anabolic effect of parathyroid
hormone on bone after discontinuation of hormone in rats. Bone 10:447–452;1989.
14. Harrigan, T. P., Jasty, M., Mann, R. W., and Harris, W. H. Limitations of the
continuum assumption in cancellous bone. J Biomech 21:269–275; 1998.
15. Hvid, I., Andersen, K., and Olesen, S. Cancellous bone strength measurements
with the osteopenetrometer. Eng Med 13:73–78; 1984.
16. Jørgensen,P.H.andAndreassen,T.T.Influenceofbiosynthetichumangrowth
hormone on biomechanical properties of rat skin incisional wounds. Acta ChirScand 154:623–626; 1988.
17. Kalu, D. N. The ovariectomized rat model of postmenopausal bone loss. Bone
Miner 15:175–192; 1991.
18. Kalu, D. N., Echen, R., and Hollis, B. V. Modulation of ovariectomy-related
bone loss by parathyroid hormone in rats. Mech Ageing Dev 56:49–62; 1990.
19. Kalu, D. N., Pennock, J., Doyle, F. H., and Foster, G. V. Parathyroid hormone
and experimental osteosclerosis. Lancet i:1363–1366; 1970.
20. Lafage, M.-H., Balena, R., Battle, M. A., Shea, M., Seedor, J. G., Klein, H.,
Hayes, W. C., and Rodan, G. A. Comparison of Alendronate and sodiumfluoride effects on cancellous and cortical bone in minipigs: A one year study.J Clin Invest 95:2127–2133; 1995.
21. Li,M.,Mosekilde,Li.,Søgaard,C.H.,andWronski,T.J.Parathyroidhormone
monotherapy and cotherapy with antiresorptive agents restore vertebral bonemass and strength in aged ovariectomized rats. Bone 16:629–635; 1995.
22. Liu, C. C. and Kalu, D. N. Human parathyroid hormone-(1-34) prevents bone
loss and augments bone formation in sexually mature ovariectomized rats.J Bone Miner Res 5:973–982; 1990.
23. Liu, C. C., Kalu, D. N., Salerno, E., Echen, R., Hollis, B. W., and Ray, M.
Pre-existing bone loss associated with ovariectomy in rats is reversed byparathyroid hormone. J Bone Miner Res 6:1071–1080; 1991.
24. Marcus, R., Butterfield, G., Holloway, L., Gilliland, L., Baylink, D. J., Hintz,
R. L., and Sherman, B. M. Effects of short term administration of recombinanthuman growth hormone to elderly people. J Clin Endocrin Metab 70:519–527;
1990.
25. Mosekilde, Li. Assessing bone quality—animal models in preclinical osteopo-
rosis research. Bone 17(Suppl.):343S–352S; 1995.
26. Mosekilde, Li. Osteoporosis: Mechanisms and models. In: Whitfield, J. F. and
Morley,P.,Eds.AnabolicTreatmentsforOsteoporosis.BocaRaton,FL:CRC;1998; 31–58.
27. Mosekilde, Li. and Bak, B. The effect of growth hormone on fracture healing
in rats—a histological investigation. Bone 14:19–27; 1993.
28. Mosekilde,Li.,Danielsen,C.C.,andGasser,J.A.Theeffectonvertebralbone
mass and strength of long term treatment with antiresorptive agents (estrogenand calcitonin), human parathyroid hormone (1-38), and combination therapy,assessed in aged ovariectomized rats. Endocrinology 134:2126–2134; 1994.
29. Mosekilde, Li., Danielsen, C. C., and Knudsen, U. B. The effect of aging and
ovariectomy on the vertebral bone mass and biomechanical properties ofmature rats. Bone 14:1–6; 1993.
30. Mosekilde,Li.,Danielsen,C.C.,Søgaard,C.H.,McOsker,J.E.,andWronski,
T. J. The anabolic effects of parathyroid hormone on cortical bone mass,dimensions and strength—assessed in a sexually mature, ovariectomized ratmodel. Bone 16:223–230; 1995.
31. Mosekilde,Li.,Danielsen,C.C.,Søgaard,C.H.,andThorling,E.B.Theeffect
of long-term exercise on vertebral and femoral bone mass, dimensions andstrength—assessed in a rat model. Bone 15:293–301; 1994.
32. Mosekilde, Li., Kragstrup, J., and Richards, A. Compressive strength, ash
weight, and volume of vertebral trabecular bone in experimental fluorosis inpigs. Calcif Tissue Int 40:318–322; 1987.
33. Mosekilde, Li., Søgaard, C. H., McOsker, J. E., and Wronski, T. J. PTH has a
morepronouncedeffectonvertebralbonemassandbiomechanicalcompetencethanantiresorptiveagents(estrogenandbisphosphonate)—assessedinsexuallymature, ovariectomized rats. Bone 15:401–408; 1994.
34. Mosekilde, Li., Søgaard, C. H., Danielsen, C. C., Tørring, O., and Nilsson,
M. H. L. The anabolic effect of human parathyroid hormone (hPTH) on ratvertebral body mass are also reflected in the quality of bone, assessed bybiomechanical testing: A comparison study between hPTH(1-34) and hPTH(1-84). Endocrinology 129:421–428; 1991.
35. Noland, K. A., Orhii, P. B., and Kalu, D. N. Growth hormone therapy restores
cancellous bone following loss due to ovariectomy in aged rats. J Bone MinerRes 12(Suppl. 1):S240; 1997.
36. Orhii, P. B., Noland, K. A., and Kalu, D. N. Growth hormone therapy restores
cortical bone following loss due to ovariectomy in aged rats. J Bone Miner Res12(Suppl. 1):S240; 1997.
37. Pead, M. J., Skerry, T. M., and Lanyon, L. E. Direct transformation from
quiescence to bone formation in the adult periosteum following a single briefperiod of bone loading. J Bone Miner Res 3:647–656; 1988.
38. Podbesek, R., Edouard, C., Meunier, P. J., Parsons, J. A., Reeve, J., Stevenson,
R. W., and Zanelli, J. M. Effects of two treatment regimes with synthetichumanparathyroidhormonefragmentonboneformationandthetissuebalanceof trabecular bone in greyhounds. Endocrinology 112:1000–1005; 1983.
39. Qui, H., Li, M., and Wronski, T. J. A comparison of the anabolic effects of
parathyroid hormone at skeletal sites with moderate and severe osteopenia inaged ovariectomized rats. J Bone Miner Res 10:948–955; 1995.
40. Søgaard, C. H., Danielsen, C. C., Thorling, E. B., and Mosekilde, Li. Long-
term exercise of young and adult female rats: Effect on femoral neck biome-chanical competence and bone structure. J Bone Miner Res 9:409–416; 1994.
41. Søgaard, C. H., Mosekilde, Li., Schwartz, W., Leidig, G., Minne, H. W., and
Ziegler, R. Effects of fluoride on rat vertebral body biomechanical competenceand bone mass. Bone 16:163–169; 1995.
42. Søgaard, C. H., Mosekilde, Li., Thomsen, J. S., Richards, A., and McOsker,
J.E.Acomparisonoftheeffectsoftwoanabolicagents(FluorideandPTH)onash density and bone strength assessed in an osteopenic rat model. Bone20:439–449; 1997.
43. Søgaard,C.H.,Wronski,T.J.,McOsker,J.E.,andMosekilde,Li.Thepositive
effectofparathyroidhormoneonfemoralneckbonestrengthinovariectomizedrats is more pronounced than that of estrogen or bisphosphonates. Endocrinol-ogy 134:650–657; 1994.
44. Takahashi, H. E., Tanizawa, T., Hori, M., and Uzawa, T. Effect of intermittent
administration of human parathyroid hormone (1-34) on experimental osteo-porosis in rats induced by ovariectomy. The aged rat model for bone biologystudies. Cells Mater (Suppl. 1):113–117; 1991.
45. Thomsen, J. S., Ebbesen, E. N., and Mosekilde, Li. Relationships between
static histomorphometry and bone strength measurements in human iliac crestbone biopsies. Bone 22:153–163; 1998.
46. Thomsen, J. S., Gasser, J. A., and Mosekilde, Li. Long term therapy of351 Bone Vol. 23, No. 4 Li. Mosekilde et al.
October 1998:343–352 GH increases bone strength in aged ovx rats
OVX-induced osteopenia with PTH analog SDZ PTS893 and maintenance in
retired breeder rats. Bone. In press.
47. Turner, C. H. and Burr, D. B. Basic biomechanical measurements of bone: A
tutorial. Bone 14:595–608; 1993.
48. Turner, C. H., Garetto, L. P., Dunipace, A. J., Zhang, W., Wilson, M. E.,
Grynpas,M.D.,Chachra,D.,McClintock,R.,Peacock,M.,andStookey,G.K.Fluoride treatment increased serum IGF-1, bone turnover and bone mass, butnot bone strength, in rabbits. Calcif Tissue Int 61:77–83; 1997.
49. Turner, C. H., Hasegawa, K., Zhang, W., Wilson, M., and Dunipace, A. J.
Fluoride reduces bone strength in older rats. J Dent Res 74:1475–1481; 1995.
50. Tuukkanen, J., Wallmarl, B., Jalovaara, P., Takala, T., and Va ¨a¨na¨nen, K.
Changes induced in growing rat bone by immobilization and remobilization.Bone 12:113–118; 1991.
51. Verhaeghe, J., Van Bree, R., Van Herck, E., Thomas, H., Skottner, A.,
Dequeker, J., Mosekilde, Li., Einhorn, T. A., and Bouillon, R. Effects ofrecombinant human growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor-I, with orwithout 17 b-estradiol, on bone and mineral homeostasis of aged ovariecto-
mized rats. J Bone Miner Res 11:1723–1735; 1996.52. Wronski, T. J. and Yen, C.-F. Anabolic effects of parathyroid hormone on
cortical bone in ovariectomized rats. Bone 15:51–58; 1994.
53. Wronski, T. J., Yen, C.-F., and Dann, L. M. Parathyroid hormone is more
effective than estrogen or bisphosphonates for restoration of lost bone mass inovariectomized rats. Endocrinology 132:823–831; 1993.
54. Yeh, J. K., Aloia, J. F., and Chen, M. Growth hormone administration
potentiates the effect of treadmill exercise on log bone formation but not onvertebrae in middle aged rats. Calcif Tissue Int 54:38–43; 1994.
55. Zhang, L., Takahashi, H. E., Inoue, J., Tanizawa, T., Endo, N., Yamamoto, N.,
and Hori, M. Effects of intermittent administration of low dose human PTH(1-34)oncancellousandcorticalboneoflumbarvertebralbodiesinadultbeagles.Bone 21:501–506; 1997.
Date Received: March 13, 1998
Date Revised: June 9, 1998
Date Accepted: June 9, 1998352 Li. Mosekilde et al. Bone Vol. 23, No. 4
GH increases bone strength in aged ovx rats October 1998:343–352
