Bom Vol. 19, No. 4 
October 1996~317-328 
ELSEVIER 
PI Integrins and Osteoclast Function: Involvement in 
Collagen Recognition and Bone Resorption 
M. H. HELFRICH,’ S. A. NESBITT,2 P. T. LAKKAKORPI,3 M. J. BARNES; S. C. BODARY,5 G. SHANKAR,6 
W. T. MASON,7 D. L. MENDRICK ,* H. K. VÄÄNÄNEN,3 and M. A. HORTON 
1 Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Vniversity of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland 
’ Department of Medicine, Vniversi@ College, London, UK 
3 Department of Anatomy, Univers@ of Oulu, Oulu, Finland 
4 Strangeways Research Laboratoty, Cambridge, UK 
s Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA 
6 NPS Pharmaceuticals Inc., Salt Lake City, UT USA 
’ Depattment of Neurobiology, The Babraham Institute, Babraham, Cambridge, UK 
’ Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA 
The extracellular matrix of hone is composed mainly of type 
1 collagen. In this report we studied the role and collagen- 
binding properties of osteoclast integrins (q,, OL*, pi, and &). 
Cel1 adhesion assays with rat osteoclasts and afllnity chro- 
matography/SDS-PAGE analysis with purified human osteo- 
clast memhranes demonstrated adhesion of osteoclasts to na- 
tive type 1 collagen in a divalent cation and Arg-Gly-Asp 
(RGD)-dependent way via o& integrin, whereas osteoclast 
adhesion to denatured collagen predominantly involved 
ar&. In receptor-binding assays, the involvement of human 
recombinant QL,& in adhesion to denatured collagen was 
contlrmed. Additionally, osteoclasts adhered to type 1 colla- 
gen fibers and to monomeric types D-V collagen with char- 
acteristics similar to those on native monomeric type 1 colla- 
gen. Osteoclastic bone resorption in vitro was inhibited 
(MO%) in the presence of <y2 and R1 antibodies. Using scan- 
ning laser confocal microscopy, cx,&, <yi, and R1 integrin 
were detected withm podosomes in nonresorbing osteoclasts 
and in the ruflled border area and basolateral membrane in 
resorbing osteoclasts, but not in the sealing zone of resorbing 
osteoclasts. These results demontrate that c&, in addition 
to cx,&, has an important role in osteoclast function and acts 
as a receptor for native, but not denatured, collagen. (Bene 
19:317-328; 1996) 
Key Words: l3, integrins; Osteoclast; Bone resorption; Colla- 
gen; Cel1 adhesion; Vitronectin receptor. 
Introduction 
Osteoclasts are large multinucleated cells responsible for the 
breakdown of the extracellular matrix of bone during normal or 
pathological bone tumover. Resorption of bone involves migra- 
tion of osteoclasts to the area of bone to be remodeled and 
Address for correspondence and reprints: Dr. M. H. Helfrich, Depart- 
ment of Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Aberdeen Medical 
School, Polwarth Building, Foresterhill, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, Scotland. 
E-mail: m.helfrich@aberdeen.ac.uk. polarization of the cel1 to create three discrete areas of plasma 
membrane: first, the basolateral membrane, the part of the 
plasma membrane not in contact with the bone matrix facing the 
bone marrow space; second, the sealing zone (or “clear zone”), 
the plasma membrane closely apposed to the bone matrix; and 
third, the ruffled border, the highly convoluted area of plasma 
membrane surrounded by the sealing zone, which faces and is in 
part in direct contact with the bone matrix. The sealing zone 
forms a diffusion banier and so permits the localized accumu- 
lation of high concentrations of protons and proteases secreted by 
the osteoclasts via the ruffled border membrane into an extracel- 
lular resorption compartment undemeath the ce11.3 
Adhesion of osteoclasts to the bone surface involves interac- 
tions of adhesion molecules on the cel1 with extracellular matrix 
proteins within the bone matrix. Several groups have shown that 
the integrin vitronectin receptor (VNR, oJ13) is essential in the 
attachment of osteoclasts to the bone surface by demonstrating 
that blocking the interaction of VNR witb its natura1 ligand in the 
bone matrix causes detachment of osteoclasts and inhibits bone 
resorption. 7,15,18,19,27,31,35,48 The closest interaction between the 
osteoclast plasma membrane and bone matrix occurs in the seal- 
ing zone and adhesion molecules are expected to be present 
specifïcally within this structure (reviewed in Reference 53). 
There is conflicting data, however, regarding this issue with lo- 
calization of VNR, or the (Y, subunit, having been reported 
within the sealing zone by some groups41,45 and not found by 
others.35,38 The question of which adhesion molecules are re- 
sponsible for maintaining the tight sealing zone in resorbing 
osteoclasts is therefore not settled and with it the matter of which 
components in the bone matrix are recognized. 
In addition to VNR, two other integrins, oZ& and @,, have 
been identified on osteoclasts by immunocytochemical and bio- 
chemical techniques.9,24,43 Functional and detailed localization 
studies of l3, integrins on osteoclasts have so far not been re- 
ported. Both 0213114~32~50 and CX,&‘~ are known to be collagen 
receptors in a variety of cel1 types. Adhesion of osteoclasts to 
type 1 collagen is likely to be significant as type 1 collagen is the 
major protein in the organic matrix of bone. Previously, we have 
established that, in an in vitro adhesion assay, rat osteoclasts 
recognize a wide range of proteins including osteopontin, bone 
sialoprotein, fibronectin, fibrinogen, and vitronectin via VNR 
0 1996 by Elswier Science Inc. 
AU rights reserved. 317 8756-3282/96/$15.00 
PI1 S8756-3282(96)00223-2 
and, in addition. adhere to native type l collagen via a VNR- 
independent mechanism.” 
Herein, we further invertigate the functional properties of B, 
integrins in osteoclasts from a number of species. including hu- 
man. Om results demonstrate that B, integrins are important in 
osteoclastic bone resorption, which may be related to their ability 
to confer adhesion to native type 1 collagen, but may also be 
related to other functions. such as in signal transduction. We also 
demonstrate that Bi. rather than B,, integrins are involved in the 
recognition of denatured collagen by osteoclasts, suggesting dif- 
ferent levels of control via adhesion mechanisms during the re- 
sorption process. 
Materials and Methods 
Collagens, Collagen Frqments, and Other Ligand~\ 
All collagen preparations were used at a saturating 20 pg/mL 
concentration after preliminary titration (not show@. Monomeric 
collagens used were rat type 1; bovine types 1 and 111; and human 
types 1, 111, IV, and V (al] from Sigma, Poole, Dorset, UK). 
Bovine type 11 collagen was a generous gift from Dr. S. Ayad 
(Department of Biochemistry, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK). A dispersion of native fibrillar type 1 collagen 
from bovine tendon l6 was generously provided by Ethicon 
(Somerville, NJ). Before use, the dispersion was diluted to 500 
p,g/mL with 0.01 moVL acetic acid, and extensively dialyzed 
against 0.01 mol/L acetic acid. The resulting dispersion was 
stored at 4°C and used at a saturating coating concentration of 
100 p,g/mL. Stock solutions of monomeric collagens were pre- 
pared at 1 mg/mL in 0.01 mol/L acetic acid and stored at 4°C. 
Denatured collagens or collagen fragments were prepared by 
heating the solution at working concentration to 60°C for 30 min. 
Constituent 01, chains were obtained from bovine type 1 col- 
lagen by ion-exchange chromatography and further purified by 
gel filtration.‘6 Subsequently LX,(I) chains were fragmented with 
cyanogen bromide (CB) and the resultant peptides separated by 
a combination of ion-exchange chromatography and gel filtration 
as described previously.” Similarly prepared CB fragments of 
rat CL, (1) chains were a generous gift from Dr. P. Bomstein (De- 
partment of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA). 
Homotrimers of <r,(I) and a,(I) chains were prepared from 
bovine o,(I) and a,(I) chains, respectively, by prolonged incu- 
bation of chains in 0.225 mol/L citrate buffer (pH 3.7) and 
subsequent purification as described previously.‘6 
Antibodies 
Al1 antibodies were used at previously determined lg concentra- 
tions that were maximally inhibitory on osteoclast adhesion (ti- 
tration data not shown, concentrations used are indicated in the 
figure legends). We used previously described monoclonal anti- 
integrin antibodies Fl 1 to rat BarZ Ha 2/11 to rat B, and Ha 1/29 
to rat (Y~,~O 7C.5 and 4F6’ to human o& with cross-reactivity in 
rat, 13C2 to human (Y, and 23C6 to human (Y&,*~ HAS-6 to 
human o2 (a kind gift from Dr. F. Watt, ICRF, London, UK), 
K20 to human B , . ’ PlE6 to human <y? (obtained from Telios, La 
Jolla, San Diego, CA), and F2/18 to a shared epitope on human 
CX, and o2 (a gift from Dr. K. Stewart, Department of Medicine 
and Therapeutics, Aberdeen, UK)5’ F2/18 was used as an anti 01~ 
reagent because osteoclasts do not express 01, .43 We also used a 
polyclonal anti-rat B, (Lot No. 880413; kindly provided by Dr. Rubin, Cppsala University. Uppsala. Sweden).“’ Blocking anti~ 
body Al7 to the cel]-binding domain of bovine fibronectin was 
obtaincd from Gibco (Paisley. Scotland). 
Prptides 
Al1 peptides were used at previously determined maximally ef- 
fective concentrations (not shown). The RGD sequence- 
containing snake venom protein, kistrin (used at 500 nmol/L). 
and a cyclic RGD peptide (used at 500 nmol/L) G4120 (a sulf- 
oxide cyclic pentapeptide containing o-Tyr-Arg-Gly-Asp-Cyx. 
which is conformationally constrained in aqueous solution) were 
provided by Genentech Inc. (South San Francisco, CA). Linear 
GRGDSP and GRGESP peptides (each used at 800 pmol/L) 
were purchased from Peninsula Labs (Belmont, CA). DGEA 
peptide analogs were synthesized by Genentech Inc. (DGEA- 
NH,, ac-DGEA-NHa, ac-GPAGKDGEAGAQG-NH,) and ICRF 
(KGDEA. KDGE). All were used at concentrations up to 25 
mmol/L. 
0ste0c1u.rr.s 
Rat bone cel1 suspensions containing osteoclasts were obtained 
from long bones of newbom Sprague-Dawley rats as previously 
described*’ and kept in minima1 essential medium (MEM with 
Earle’s salts, Gibco, Paisley, Scotland) on ice until use. Osteo- 
clasts were also obtained from osteoclastoma tumor by mincing 
tissue fragments in MEM and subsequently carrying out manipu- 
lations as for rat osteoclasts. Osteoclasts obtained from newbom 
mice and rabbits, similarly to rat osteoclasts, were used to verify 
some of the findings in other mammalian species. 
Bone Resorption Assq 
Bone resorption was studied using the pit assay, essentially as 
described by Amett and Dempster.’ Osteoclasts (from rat bone. 
or osteoclastoma, as above) were settled onto slices of dentine in 
the wells of 96-well plates for 1 h (rat), or 2 h (human). Non- 
adherent cells were removed by washing the wells with medium, 
and antibodies or peptides were added and the slices cultured for 
another 2 days in MEM supplemented with 20 mmol/L HEPES, 
10% FCS, 2 mmol/L L-glutamine and 100 IU each of penicillin 
and streptomycin (operating pH at 5% CO, is 6.9-7.0). At the 
end of the culture period, the slices were fixed in 2.5% glutar- 
aldehyde, osteoclasts were stained for presence of tartrate- 
resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP, Sigma Kit 386-A), and the 
number of osteoclasts counted. Subsequently, the cells were me- 
chanically removed from the slices and the resorption pits stained 
with toluidine blue, or hematoxylin. The number of resorption 
pits was expressed as number per osteoclast. 
Cel1 Attachment ASSLIJ 
Wells of 96.well (Falcon No. 3072, Becton Dickinson, Cowley. 
Oxford, UK) or 24-wel1 tissue-culture plates (Costar No. 3524, 
Cambridge, MA) were coated with 100 pL or 250 pL, respec- 
tively, of solutions of the attachment proteins at previously de- 
termined optimal coating concentrations*’ in MEM by incubat- 
ing for 2 h at 37’C, or for 16 h at 4°C as appropriate. Nonspecific 
binding sites in wells were blocked with BSA and the adhesion 
assay was carried out as before” using 100 pL of cel1 suspension 
(with unknown number of “input” osteoclasts because they can- 
not easily be identified in mixed cel1 suspensions) in 96-wel1 
plates and 250 yL in 24-wel1 plates and leaving osteoclasts to 
Bone Vol. 19, No. 4 
October 1996:317-328 M. H. Helfrich et al. 319 
p, integrins and osteoclast function 
adhere for 1 h, which allows time for the cells to spread suffi- 
ciently to be counted accurately. Attached osteoclasts were 
scored after staining for TRAP. Results were expressed as per- 
centage of control values (i.e., adhesion to FCS, when comparing 
different substrates, or adhesion in the absente of inhibitor in 
inhibition studies) within the same experiment. Al1 experiments 
were done in duplicate and repeated three or more times. Typi- 
cally, the number of attached osteoclasts in controls ranged from 
20 to 80 per well. FCS (10% in PBS) was used as a positive and 
BSA (1 mg/mL) as a negative control ligand. 
Measurement of Osteoclast Spreading 
In two experiments the spread area of osteoclasts was assessed. 
Rat osteoclasts were allowed to adhere as described above and 
the fixed, TRAP stained cells were examined on a monitor at- 
tached to an inverted microscope. Al1 fully visible osteoclasts 
were drawn with a mouse on a digitizing tablet attached to a PC 
using VIDS V software (Analytical Measuring Systems, Cam- 
bridge, UK). Cel1 area was calculated and p values for the mean 
calculated using Student’s t-tests. Differences were considered 
significant if p c 0.05. 
Inhibition of Osteoclast Adhesion by Antibodies and Peptides 
Antibody and peptide inhibition experiments were carried out by: 
(1) adding inhibitors to the cel1 suspension on ice, 10 min before 
plating out and subsequently allowing the osteoclasts to adhere in 
the presence of inhibitors for 1 h, as above; or (2) allowing 
osteoclasts to adhere for 1 h, washing off nonadherent cells with 
PBS, and adding the inhibitors at previously determined concen- 
trations (as above) for an additional 1 h at 37”C, 5% CO,, after 
which the preparations were washed, fixed, and TRAP-stained as 
above. Essentially similar results were obtained using these two 
protocols. Antibodies and peptides were added in minima1 vol- 
umes to give the final concentrations stated. 
Solid Phase Receptor-Binding Assay for (YJ~~ 
The solid phase binding assay utilizing recombinant human (Y,& 
was essentially as described in Horton et a1.29 using native and 
heat denatured type 1 collagens. 
Statistical Analysis of Adhesion Assays 
Results are expressed as the percentage of osteoclasts bound after 
normalization to values obtained with binding to FCS-coated 
plastic (cel1 adhesion assays) or vitronectin (solid phase assay). 
In inhibition assays, the effect of addition of MEM medium or 
buffer in place of antibody or peptide was used to normalize the 
percentage inhibition of osteoclast or receptor binding. Each as- 
say point represents the mean and SEM from three or more 
replicate experiments. Experiments in which osteoclast yields 
were low (less than 10 per well) were rejected from analysis. 
p-values for both assays were calculated by the Mann-Whitney 
U test and differences considered significant if p < 0.05. 
Immunocytochemistry 
Localization of integrins in resting and resorbing human osteo- 
clasts was performed as described in detail previously.36 Osteo- 
clasts were isolated from osteoclastoma (as above), or mechani- 
cally released from long bones of human fetuses from pregnancy 
terminations (12-19 week gestation) with local ethical commit- tee approval and following the Polkinghorne guidelines. Osteo- 
clasts were settled onto bone or dentine slices and cultured for 
1-2 days in MEM, with supplements as described above (resorp- 
tion assay). Cells were fïxed in paraformaldehyde (3% with 2% 
sucrose in PBS) for 5 min, permeabilized for 5 min on ice (0.5% 
Triton X-100 in HEPES buffer), washed in PBS, blocked with 
10% FCS in PBS, and incubated with primary antibody to inte- 
grin subunits, followed by incubation with an appropriate sec- 
ondary antibody labeled with FITC, or biotin. Biotin was de- 
tected by avidin TrITC. Sealing zones were detected by labeling 
F-actin with phalloidi&TrITC, or phalloidin/FITC (both from 
Sigma) as appropriate. Stained bone slices were embedded in 
80% glycerol in PBS. Resorption lacunae were detected by non- 
confocal transmission microscopy. Slices were analyzed with a 
Leica laser scanning confocal microscope, equipped with an ar- 
gon-crypton laser in which lines of 488 and 568 nm can be 
selected. Resorbing osteoclasts were identified in the nonconfo- 
cal mode by phalloidin staining and, subsequently, integrin lo- 
calization was examined by XY and XZ scanning. A minimum of 
100 osteoclasts stained for any individual integrin subunit were 
examined. 
Collagen Afinity Chromatography of Osteoclast 
Membrane Proteins 
Human osteoclastoma (OCL) membranes (10 mg) were prepared 
and labeled by biotinylation as previously described.42 Osteo- 
clast membranes were purified from the osteoclastoma mem- 
brane pool using antibody 13C2 (anti+,) and positive immuno- 
magnetic selection, a procedure which gives high yield and pu- 
Figure 1. Morphology of osteoclasts on FCS and collagen substrates. (a) 
Typical well-spread, multinucleated osteoclast 1 h after settling on FCS- 
coated plastic. (b) Typical morphology of rat osteoclast (arrow) adhering 
to type 1 collagen fibers (clearly visible by light microscopy). (c) Typical 
morphology of rat osteoclasts (arrows) 1 h after settling onto native 
monomeric type 1 collagen. Note the reduction in cel1 spreading com- 
pared with (a). (d) Morphology of rat osteoclasts (arrows) settled onto 
denatured type 1 collagen (heated for 30 min at 60°C). Note the differ- 
ence between (c) and (d), the latter showing better cytoplasmic spreading. 
(a)-(d) Stained for tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase; original magnifi- 
cation x200; bar = 20 Pm. 
320 M. H. Helt’rxh ct al. Bene Vol. 19, No. -i 
p, integrins and os~eoclast function October 1996:317-3X 
Table 1. Rat osícoclast adhesion to monomeric collagen and collagen 
tïbers teins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and probed by immunoblov 
enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL, Amersham, UK) as previ- 
ously described.42 
Percentage of adherent 
osteoclasts” Results 
Species Substrate il (mean + SD) 
Rat Native type 1 132 15.3 + 3.Y 
Bovine Native type 1 6 82.2 f 9.0h 
Rat Denatured type 1 2x 18.3 t 4sh 
Bovine Denatured type 1 6 75.3+5.1h 
Bovine Native type 1 fibers 25 59.3 *5.1h 
Coating concentrations were 20 Fg/mL for monomeric collagens and 100 
kg/mL for collagen fibers and conditions were as described in Materials 
nnd Methbds. n = number of observations. Differences between rat and 
bovine type 1 and between native and denatured type 1 were not signifi- 
cant @ > 0.05 using the Mann-Whitney Li test). Adhesion to minor 
collagens of bone is given in the text. 
“Normalized for adhesion to FCS (= 100%) within the same 
experiment 
‘Significantly different from adhesion to FCS, p < 0.01. Adhesion Studies 
rity of osteoclast membranes as previously described.3’ The 
affinity of osteoclast proteins for native human type 1 and type IV 
collagen and denatured type 1 collagen was assessed as follows: 
Native collagens were dissolved in 0. IN acetic acid and mixed 
gently for 16 h at 4°C. Native or heat-denatured (as above) 
collagen (2.5 mg/mL) was covalently bound to a 1 mL suspen- 
sion of glutaraldehyde-activated magnetic beads (Advanced 
Magnetics, UK) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Col- 
umns were run in the presence of 3 mmol/L MgCl, in lysis buffer 
(100 mmol/L octyl-P-gluco-pyranoside [OGP, Calbiochem, 
UK], 1 mmol/L PMSF, 1% aprotinin in Tris-buffered saline). A 
negative control column (coated with 2.5 mg/mL of BSA) was 
run under the same conditions. The osteoclast membrane lysate 
was divided equally between the columns and allowed to mix 
gently ovemight at 4°C. Batch washing of, and elution from, 
columns of the isolated osteoclast membrane proteins was done 
by magnetic separation. Each column was washed serially for 10 
min in 3 mL volumes of wash buffer (OGP lysis buffer, but with 
25 mmol/L octyl-/3-o-thio-glucopyranoside [Calbiochem]). The 
wash procedure was repeated five times. Elution was performed 
by batch incubation of the washed collagen columns with 10 mM 
of EDTA in wash buffer without cations. Rat osteoclasts adhered wel1 to monomeric type 1 collagen, both 
rat and bovine, as wel1 as bovine fibrillar type 1 collagen (Figure 
1 and Table 1). They also adhered wel1 to bovine types 11 and III 
collagen (60% and 58%. respectively, compared with FCS), but 
adhesion to human types IV and V collagen (35% and 26%, 
respectively, compared with FCS) was less. It is unclear whether 
this is due to species differences or whether these types of col- 
lagen are less wel1 recognized by osteoclasts in general. In bio- 
chemical assays (see below) human osteoclast membranes did 
bind to human type IV collagen with an affinity similar to that of 
human type 1 collagen. Spreading of osteoclasts on collagen was 
less than on FCS-coated substrates (Figure l), but was increased 
when, after 1 h attachment to collagen-coated plastic and re- 
moval of nonadherent cells, adherent osteoclasts were cultured 
for a further hour in the presence of 10% FCS (Table 2). The 
increase in cel1 spreading after addition of FCS was blocked in 
the presence of p3 antibody, but osteoclasts remained attached to 
the collagen substrate (Table 2). This demonstrates. first. that 
different receptors are involved in binding to type 1 collagen and 
FCS (adhesion proteins in FCS being predominantly vitronectin, 
which is recognized by B3 integrin)*’ and, second, that ps is not 
involved in binding to native collagen. Osteoclasts also adhered 
wel1 to denatured type 1 collagen (Figure ld and Tdble l), and 
appeared better spread than on native type 1 (Figure IC). NO 
significant differences were seen between rat or bovine type 1 
collagen (both native and denatured; Table 1) and in the fol- 
lowing experiments we used rat type 1 collagen unless stated 
otherwise. 
The specificity of the adhesion assay in measuring adhesion 
to the coated protein has been evaluated previously.23 Adhesion 
experiments after incubation of the bone cel1 suspension in cy- 
cloheximide or monensin were performed, to try to avoid adhe- 
sion to proteins secreted by osteoclasts, but these failed to show 
any differences. During short adhesion times (15 min rather than 
1 h) essentially similar results were also obtained. 
Eluted proteins were assessed for presence of integrins by 
immunoprecipitation using HAS-6 (<yZ), K20 (p,), and 23C6 
(oI,&) monoclonal antibodies (al1 at 5 p,g Ig/mL). Isolated pro- Blocking Studies With RGD Peptides 
To extend our earlier finding that adhesion of osteoclasts to 
collagen is RGD-dependent we included two different RGD- 
Table 2. Cytoplasmic spreading of rat osteoclasts on collagen versus serum-coated surfaces: effect of serum proteins and anti-& 
antibody 
Group First (coated) substrate Second (soluble) 
substrate Antibody Osteoclast spread area, 
mean + SD (~10~ km*) n 
1 Native type 1 collagen None 
2 Native type 1 collagen None 
3 Native type 1 collagen FCS 
4 Native type 1 collagen FCS 
5 FCS None 
6 FCS Collagen type 1 None 2.71 + 2.09 28 
Anti+, 3.10* 1.37 12 
None 6.09 k 3.43“ 19 
Anti-& 2.23 + 1.13b 12 
None 8.07 t 6.52” 51 
None 7.88 + 4.08” 20 
Collagen was coated at 20 pg/mL and FCS at 10% in PBS for 16 h at 4°C. Osteoclasts were allowed to adhere to the first coated 
substrate for 1 h, nonadherent cells were removed, and MEM with or without FCS (10%) or collagen (20 &mL) and/or antibody was 
added, after which adherent cells were allowed to spread for another hour. Cells were fixed and stained for TRAP and the osteoclast 
spread area was determined as described in Materials and Methods. n = number of osteoclast profiles analyzed. This experiment was 
repeated twice with essentially similar results. 
‘p < 0.01 vs. i ;’ I, < 0.01 vs. 3 (Student’s r-test). 
Bone Vol. 19, No. 4 M. H. Helfrich et al. 
October 1996:317-328 B1 integrins and osteoclast function 321 
containing compounds (used at two- to tenfold their respective 
IC,, values on FCS)” and also utilized denatured type 1 collagen 
as substrate. Al1 three RGD-containing peptides reduced adhe- 
sion by 270% on both native (Figure 2A) and denatured type 1 
collagen (Figure 2B). RGE-containing peptide, used as a nega- 
tive control peptide, had a much smaller effect on native type 1 
bl*ar cyclic Kistrln llnur 
RGD RGD ROE 
natie type I collagen 
120 
1 B 
x osteoclast 60 - 
rdharion 
Illuar CyCliC Kisttin IiMU 
RGD RGD RGE 
demtund type I collagen 
120 C 
100 
%08toocl~1 60- 
adheslon 
IiruU IIIIOW 
RGD RGE 
type I Rbors 
Figure 2. Inhibition of rat osteoclast adhesion to type 1 collagen by 
RGD-containing peptides. Collagen was denatnred for 30 min at 60°C. 
Monomeric collagens were coated at 20 pg/mL and collagen fïbers at 
100 pg/mL for 2 h at 37T. Osteoclasts were allowed to adhere for 1 h 
at 37°C in the presence of peptides at a final concentration of 800 
p,mmol/L (linear RGDIRGE) and 500 nmol/L (cyclic RGDKistin). Ad- 
hesion in absente of inhibitors was taken as 100%. Show is the mean f 
SEM of at least eight independent experiments. *p < 0.005; **p < 0.001; 
***p < 0.0001 (Mw-Whitney U test). collagen (25% reduction) and had no significant effect on dena- 
tured type 1 collagen. Osteoclast adhesion to native fibrillar type 
1 collagen was also inhibited by RGD, but not RGE, peptides 
(Figure 2C). Adhesion to native and denatured types 11 and BI 
collagen was also RGD-sensitive, but not RGE-sensitive (data 
not shown). 
Blocking Studies With Anti-Integrin Antibodies 
Antibodies to Bj and (Y, failed to significantly black adhesion to 
native type 1 collagen (Figure 3), both singly and in combina- 
tion, but Bi polyclonal antibody reduced adhesion to native type 
1 collagen by >60% and B1 monoclonal antibody by >80%, with- 
out affecting adhesion to serum-coated substrates (FCS data not 
shown). The o2 antibody virtually abolished binding to native 
type 1 collagen (Figure 3A), without affecting adhesion to serum- 
coated substrates (FCS data not shown). Combinations of <yZ, Br, 
and B3 antibodies did not have additive effects. Also, combina- 
tions of (Y, and Br antibodies (used in the absente of an OL$, 
complex-specific antibody) had no significant additive effect. 
On denatured collagen, a different mechanism of adhesion 
was observed (Figure 3B). Here, B1 and cr2 antibodies had little 
inhibitory effect, but B3 antibody almost completely abolished 
adhesion. The <y, antibody was less potent than Ba, and combi- 
nations of (Y, and Br did not have any additive effect. 
In contrast to monomeric collagens, osteoclast adhesion to 
native fibrillar type 1 collagen was inhibited to some degree 
(20-40%) by antibodies to (Y,, Ba, and Br (Figure 3C), with 
significant additive effects with the combination of Bi and B3 
antibodies, in particular with the Br monoclonal antibody. Also, 
the combination of (Y* and B3 antibody completely abolished 
adhesion to collagen fibers. Again, no clear involvement of c& 
could be demonstrated. Possible explanations for these differ- 
ences between native monomeric collagen type 1 and fibrillar 
collagen are discussed later. 
Collagen Binding Site 
NO clear results were obtained in studies aimed to identify the 
binding site in the collagen molecule. NO single cyanogen bro- 
mide (CB)-cleaved fragment of the ou,(I) chain reproduced bind- 
ing to the leve1 seen in the intact collagen, with best adhesion to 
the CB7 fragment (32-56% compared to FCS). CB7 adhesion, 
however, was strongly inhibited by antibodies to B3 and B1 (data 
not shown), suggesting binding to site not involved in adhe- 
sion in the intact collagen molecule. 
Absente of adhesion to the CB3 fragment (reported to contain 
the platelet ci2 integrin recognition site in type 1 collagen) was 
unexpected. However, blocking of collagen adhesion by DGEA- 
containing peptides (four nominally active DGEA-containing 
and one “negative control” DGE peptide; see Materials and 
Methods for full sequence) at concentrations Erom 3 mmol/L up 
to 25 mmol/L also did not support specific recognition of this site 
with both the DGEA and the DGE peptide inhibiting osteoclast 
adhesion by 50%. 
In view of the poor adhesion to a,(I)-chain CB fragments, 
comparisons between the adhesive properties of a,(I) and q(I) 
chains were made, but both chains behaved identically, (60% 
adhesion compared to intact native type 1 collagen), whether 
tested in native (homotrimeric) or denatured forms and with 
similar effects of Br and B3 antibodies as noted with the parent 
collagen (data not shown). 
322 M. H. Helt’rich et al. Btrnc Vul. 19, No. -1 
l3, integrins and osteoclast t’uncl~n October 1996:3 I7-‘1X 
EO- 
60- 
40- 
20 - ** ** ** ** 
o- &-*- 
B3 av av pl nv l31 I31 a2 61 a2 I3l 
+P3 +p1 +p3 +a2 +p3 +P3 
l-polyclonal p1-l c- monoclonal pl P 
native type I collagen 
160 
B 
140 
120- 
166- 
60- 
60- 
40- 
20- ** 
OJA ** ** 
-- 
B3 av pt av I3t a2 61 a2 PI 
+Pt +a2 +I33 +83 
tpolyclorul61-r - monoclonal Bi + 
denetured type I collagen 
160- 
C 
140- 
83 av av PI av 61 PI a2 BI a2 61 
+I33 +p1 +p3 +a2 +p3 +p3 
cpolyclcd p1+ - monoclonal p14 
type I fibers To fully investigate the biochemical nature of the collagen bind- 
ing integrins on osteoclast membranes and confirm the associa- 
tion of the subunits, affinity chromatography experiments with 
collagen columns were performed and eluted proteins assessed 
by immunoprecipitation with antibodies to cx2, l3,, and cy& in- 
tegrins (Figure 4). In these experiments, we used purified human 
osteoclast plasma membranes isolated from osteoclastoma as dc- 
scribed by Nesbitt et al.‘” 
Osteoclast l3, and 01~ integrins bound native type 1 collagen in 
the presence of 3 mmol/L Mg” or 3 mmol/L Ca2’ but in the 
presence of Ca” receptors bound with less aftïnity. Only results 
obtained in the presence of Mg’+ are illustrated. l3, was immu- 
noprecipitated as a broad band with an apparent molecular mass 
between 110 and 130 kDa (Figure JA, lane 4). This band was 
associated with a weaker band of higher molecular mass which 
was of comparable mobility to oZ, at 160 kDa (Figure 4A, lane 
3). Osteoclast olv& showed little affinity for native type 1 colla- 
gen; a faint band was detected at a molecular mass of 90 kDa, the 
mobility expected for pq (Figure 4A, lane 2). 
Osteoclast (Y\,P~ showed more affinity for native type 1 co- 
lagen with approximately equal amounts of o,p7. q and p, 
integrins being bound (Figure 4C). Antibodies to oZ and l3, 
integrins immunoprecipitated comparable amounts of receptor 
from the eluates of denatured and native type 1 collagen columns 
(Figures 4A vs. 4C. lanes 3 and 4). 
A similar pattern of integrin binding was found using native 
type IV collagen. but with higher levels of CY$, (data not 
shown). 
Recognition of Collagen by Purified Recombinant Human 
(Y,P_~ Receptor 
Recombinant aJ3, and aJ3, expressing cel1 lines4,x have been 
made but they cannot be used in collagen adhesion assays be- 
cause the parental strain used for transfection, 293 renal epithe- 
hal cells. binds to collagen via pre-existing expressed I3, inte- 
grins. An o(,&. but not oJ3, or oiJ,, solid phase assay using 
purified recombinant human receptor is available and was used 
to examine the involvement of this receptor in recognition of 
denatured collagen (Table 3). Binding of VNR to denatured 
collagen was 25% that of control binding to vitronectin (but three 
times as high as binding to native type 1 collagen) and sensitive 
to inhibition by RGD-containing peptides (>90% reduction in 
binding, p<O.OOl), as would be expected for an cx,&integrin 
mediated event. 
Resorption As.sa)s 
Preliminary experiments with a function blocking polyclonal an- 
tibody to rat I3, showed inhibition of resorption in the pit assay 
(data not shown). Because of the greater availability of blocking 
Figure 3. Inhibition of rat osteoclast adhesion to collagen type 1 by 
anti-integrin antibodies. Collagens were coated as in Figure 2. Osteo- 
clasts were allowed to adhere in the presence of antibodies for 1 h at 37°C 
after which adherent cells were fixed. Antibodies were used at a con- 
centration of 50 kg/mL (p, polyclonal and OL,) and 10 @mL (p3, 0~~. 
and PI monoclonals). Adhesion in the absente of inhibitors was taken as 
100%. Shown is the mean f SEM of at least three independent experi- 
men&. *p < 0.01: **p < 0.005 vs. no antibody (Mann-Whitney U test). 
Bone Vol. 19, No. 4 
October 1996:317-328 M. H. Helfrich et al. 
B, integrins and osteoclast function 323 
1116 
97 
66 
45 
* 445 
.d 
1 2 3 4 
Figure 4. Immunoprecipitation analysis of native and denatured type 1 collagen binding integrins of purified human osteoclast membranes. Adhesion 
proteins were isolated from purified osteoclast membranes by affinity chromatography onto native type 1 collagen in the presence of 3 mmol/L Mg2+ 
(A), denatured type 1 collagen, and a negative control BSA column (B). EDTA-eluted proteins were immunoprecipitated with antibody: normal mouse 
serum (lane 1); 23C6 (CU,&, lane2); HAS-6 (cw,,lane 3); and K20 (B,,lane 4). Al1 immunoprecipitates were run nonreduced for 1 h in a 7.5% 
polyacrylamide-SDS gel, immunoblotted, probed with streptavidin horseradish peroxidase at a 1:2000 dilution, the signal developed by ECL, and blots 
exposed to film for 1 h. Molecular mass is indicated in kilodaltons. Asterisk indicates nonspecific immunoglobulin band. 
antibodies in humans, however, more extensive studies were car- 
ried out in this species. Antibodies to p, and oa inhibited resorp- 
tion by human osteoclasts in the pit assay by >40% (Figure 5). 
The experiments were performed four times with osteoclasts 
from four different osteoclastoma tumors. In al1 experiments, 
anti-VNR antibody and RGD peptide also inhibited resorption 
significantly (>80%; Figure 5). There were no significant differ- 
ences in osteoclast numbers in the presence of pi or o2, com- 
pared with controls (results not shown). In parallel experiments, 
l3, integrin antibodies also resulted in significant inhibition of 
resorption by mouse and rabbit osteoclasts (results not shown). 
Lacalization of p, and p3 Integrins on Human Osteoclasts 
The localization of l3, and p3 integrins was studied by confocal 
microscopy in resorbing human osteoclasts. The staining pattems 
observed were identical for human fetal and osteoclastoma- 
derived osteoclasts and are summarized in Table 4. In nonre- 
sorbing osteoclasts, &, pi, and o2 integrin subunits were colo- 
calized with F-actin in podosomes (focal accumulations of F- 
Table 3. Inhibition of binding of recombinant human o.,Ba receptor to 
native and denatured rat type 1 collagen by RGD-containing 
peptides 
Binding to type 1 collagen” 
Inhibitor Nativeb Denaturedb 
Ni1 0.39 f 0.27 1.01 + 0.21 
Cyclic RGD 0.06 + 0.02” 0.03 + 0.01’ 
Kistrin 0.07 + 0.04” 0.04 + 0.01’ 
“Receptor binding was meaaured as OD,,,,,, expressed as mean f SEM 
of two independent experiments (mean control binding to vitronectin, 
0D4scnm = 4.0). 
bNative and denatured collagen (heated to 60°C for 30 min) were coated 
at 20 p,g/mL in PBS. 
‘p < 0.001 vs. adhesion in absente of inhibitor (Mann-Whitney U test). actin; Figure 6A); 37354 i.e., they formed a ring around the centra1 
F-actin core (Table 4 [panel A], Figure 6B). There was mem- 
brane staining for al1 integrin subunits over the basolateral mem- 
brane and some intracellular staining (Figures 6C-F). Although 
the pi subunit was expressed in al1 cel1 types found in the bone 
cel1 cultures, o2 subunits, just as VNR, were found exclusively in 
osteoclasts. In resorbing osteoclasts, o2, p,, and VNR were 
found in the basolateral membranes. but were undetectable in the 
120 1 
Nil Echi- a@3 83 ccv Bl a2 Cr2 az+fH 
stain PlE6 Wl8 
inhibitor 
Figure 5. Inhibition of osteoclast activity by anti-integrin antibodies. 
Human osteoclastoma osteoclasts were settled on dentine slices, nonad- 
herent cells removed after 2 h and slices with adherent cells cultured for 
48 h in the presence of inhibitors as indicated. Cells were fixed, stained 
for tartrate-resistant acid phophatase, and osteoclasts counted. Then cells 
were removed and pits stained by toluidine blue and counted. Osteoclast 
activity is expressed as pits formed per osteoclast. Control resorption 
activity is 0.89 + 0.32 pits/osteoclast. Inhibitors were used at a final 
concentration of 500 nmol/L (Echistatin) and 50 p,g Ig/mL (antibodies). 
M. H. Helfrich et al. Botte Vol. 19, No. ? 
B, integrins and osteoclast functton October l996:3 17-12X 
Table 4. Colocalization of integrin with F-actin 
Yc II 8 n % n YC n 
% 51 (7) 23 (22) 0 (9) 89 (9) 
p1 
4: (6) 5 (21) 0 (23) 96 (23 
%Pi (7) 26 (27) 0 (20) 90 (20) 
Shown is the percentage osteoclasts showing colocalized staining for 
F-actin and integrin. The number of osteoclasts scanned in detail in the 
confocal mode is indicated in parentheses. At least 30 osteoclasts were 
exarnined for each category in the nonconfocal mode showing the same 
integrin distribution. 
sealing zone (Table 4 [panels B and C], Figures 6C-F and 1). 
Strong staining was observed, however, in the ruffled border 
with the staining closely following the contours of the resorption 
pit (Figure 7). Colocalization of actin-binding cytoskeletal pro- 
teins in the sealing zone was detected as illustrated for vinculin 
and gelsolin (Figures 6G and H). 
Discussion 
The role of B, integrins in adhesion and resorption was examined 
in osteoclasts from a number of species, although data is shown mainly i’or human and rat cells. The adhesion assay using rat 
osteoclasts is wel1 established.‘“.‘“~‘” Sufficient osteoclasts can 
be reproducibly obtained to test a variety of substrates, or inhibi- 
tors, in one experiment and adhesion of rat osteoclasts is very 
rapid, allowing for short incubation times, thereby minimizing 
nonspecific effects. However. for biochemical analyses in which 
larger numbers of cells are required, osteoclastoma tumor tissue 
was used. In addition, because of the greater availability of re- 
agents for demonstration and blocking of integrin subunits in the 
human model, some functional and al1 immunolocalization stud- 
ies were carried out with human osteoclasts. 
Bone resorption by human osteoclasts was inhibited signifi- 
cantly in the presence of antibodies to B, and CQ subunits. To- 
gether with the finding that significant inhibition of bone resorp- 
tion was also obtained in the rat with B, polyclonal antibody and 
in the mouse and rabbit with B, antibodies, this shows that in- 
tegrins are important in osteoclast function. 
Despite the involvement of B, and. as shown in numerous 
studies previously, u\& integrins in osteoclastic bone resorption 
we found no evidente in localization studies for presence of B, 
and o2 integrin subunits, nor the (Y$~ complex in the sealing 
zone of resorbing human osteoclasts. High levels of B,, CY*. and 
a,& were seen in the basolateral membrane and in the ruffled 
border, but not in the sealing zone, the structure believed to be 
most important in maintaining the integrity of the resorption 
compartment. These findings are in agreement with a number of 
earlier reports in chick, rat, and mouse,35.36.38 but contrast with 
the findings of Reinholt et a1.45 who reported localization of 
VNR in the sealing zone in rat osteoclasts and Neff et a14’ who 
found (Y,. but not B?, in the sealing zones of rabbit osteoclasts, 
using antibodies to cytoplasmic epitopes. Differences between 
reagents and techniques used may in part account for these dif- 
ferent findings. Even when using antibodies to intracellular epi- 
topes, however. the problem of antibody access remains, because 
association of cytoskeletal elements with ligand-occupied inte- 
Figure 6 (sec fd~wing page). Immunolocalization of integtins on human osteoclasts. Confocal microscopy in pseudocolor of osteoclasts double 
stained for F-actin (to identify resorbing and nonresorbing osteoclasts) and integrin, or cytoskeletal elements. illustrating the various stages in the 
resorption cycle as indicated in Table 4. Cells were cultured on bone slices for up to 48 h, fixed. permeabilized, and stained, in addition to F-actin, with 
antibodies as indicated in each panel, Where seen, the sealing zone is indicated by a thick arrow. (A) Staining for gelsolin (green) and F-actin (red), 
to demonstrate colocalization (shown in yellow) in podosomes (equivalent to Table 4 [panel Al). One optical section near the bone surface is shown. 
(B) Staining for oJ3a (green) and F-actin (red), showing colocalization (yellow) in podosomes (optica1 section near bone surface). The black and white 
insets show how actin farms the centra1 core of the podosome, whereas the integrin is present in a circle around this actin core. Identical pattems of 
staining were obtained when anti+, and anti-cu, antibodies were used. (C) Typical staining of osteoclasts just prior to start of excavation of resorption 
pit (equivalent to Table 4 [panel Bl). A smal1 actin ring (green) has formed, but the bone matrix underneath is not yet resorbed (nat shown). Staining 
for (ha (red) on the cel1 membrane and in the cytoplasm is strong and some areas of colocalization with F-actin are seen (arrows pointing to yellow) 
undemeath the cel1 membrane. NO colocalization is seen within the F-actin ring. One optica1 section near the bone surface is shown. (D) Resorbing 
osteoclast situated over a resorption pit (pit not shown, equivalent to Table 4 [panel C, right hand image]). Staining for B, (red) and F-actin (green). 
The apparent colocalization observed in tbe left hand panel is caused by presence of F-actin undemeath tbe plasma membrane. In an integrated image 
such as this (reconstmction of the whole cel1 from the individual optica1 slices) no clear picture is obtained, demonstrating the need for confocal 
microscopy in obtaining the necessary resolution. Note the absente of colocalization of B, and F-actin in the sealing zone, but the colocalization does 
occur underneatb tbe plasma membrane as in (C) (arrows). The sealing zone is seen in part only as this cel1 is on the edge of a resorption pit. Shown 
are two optica1 slices taken just above (middle panel) and right at (right-hand panel) the leve1 of the bone surface (Stepsize l Pm). (E) As (D), stained 
for 01~ (red) and F-actin (green). NO colocalization in the sealing zone. One optica1 section near the bone surface is shown. (F) As (D) and (E), stained 
for or,Ba (red) and F-actin (green). NO colocalization in the sealing zone (part of the sealing zone not seen is below the optical sections shown). Two 
optical sections (stepsize 1.2 Pm) near the bone surface are shown. (G) Double staining (yellow) for vinculin (green) and F-actin (red) in a resorbing 
osteoclast, illustrating colocalization in the sealing zone. Note that vinculin is seen in one broad ring, different from earlier findings in the rat and 
chick,34.52 where a double ring of vinculin is seen with actin staining in between. (H) Resorbing osteoclast (only a smal1 part of a very large osteoclasts 
is shown) stained for the presence of gelsolin (green) and F-actin (red) to illustrate colocalization in the sealing zone. Two XZ reconstructions are shown 
below and their positions in relation to the XY image are indicated by tbe numbered smal1 arrows (straight line between the arrows). Note the streng 
staining for F-actin deep down in the resorption pit (in XZ 1 and 2) and the colocalization (yellow) of actin and gelsolin on the bone surface (XZ 1. 
thick arrow, corresponding to same arrow in tbe XY view). The arrowheads indicate the contours of the resorption pit and asterisks indicate the leve1 
of the bone surface. (1) Resorbing osteoclast stained for the presence of u,,B, (green) and F-actin (red). The XY image is an optical section at the leve] 
of the bone surface. The smal1 arrows indicate tbe position of the reconstruction. Note the absente of cu,Bi staining in the sealing zone (thick arrow), 
and the presence of a smal1 amount of F-actin following the resorption pit and fïnishing in the sealing zone (double arrow corresponding to double arrow 
in top panel). The dotted line in the XZ view indicates the osteoclast surface and the asterisks indicate the leve1 of the bone surface. 
Bone Vol. 19, No. 4 
October 1996:317-328 M. H. Helfrich et al. 
PI integrins and osteoclast function 325 
Figure 6. (Caption on previous page) 
Figure 7. Immunolocalization of c& in resorption lacunae. Series of 
XY sections (stepsize 2 km) to illustrate the localiaation of CE,@, in a 
large osteoclast resorbing two resorption pits simultaneously. The images 
taken at approximately the leve1 of the bone surface are indicated by 
arrows. Note the strong a,& staining deep down in the resorption pit 
(i.e.. below the bone surface). The two dark rings (arrowheads) corre- 
spond to the sealing zone (F-actin staining and resorption pit not shown). 
grin may potentially interfere. We conclude. therefore, that de- 
spite the demonstrated importante of integrins in adhesion of 
osteoclasts to protein matrices and bone, we have been unable, 
within the limitations of the techniques used, to find evidente for 
a role of p,, o2, and (Y,,& integrins in directly maintaining the 
sealing zone. 
Very strong staining was observed with al1 anti-integrin an- 
tibodies in the ruffled border of osteoclasts, with staining extend- 
ing deep into the resorption lacunae, suggestive of a very close 
adhesive interaction between the ruffled border membrane and 
the bone surface in resorbing osteoclasts.47 We have not previ- 
ously seen this pattern of staining in resorbing osteoclasts in the 
rat and chick35,‘h and fee] it may relate to the fact that human 
osteoclasts excavate very deep resorption pits. Another novel 
finding in human osteoclasts was the presence of vinculin as a 
single band, rather than the double band previously described in 
resorbing osteoclasts in other species.‘4,“2 The significante of 
this is presently unclear and requires further study. 
The functional and biochemical data presented showed that 
osteoclasts use 01~ and l3, integrin subunits to adhere to collagen 
type 1. Although p, antibodies were not fully inhibitory, we fee] 
this may be a property of the reagents used, because inhibition of 
adhesion to native type 1 collagen by o2 antibody was almost 
complete. Participation of nonintegrin collagen binding mol- 
ecules in collagen adhesion by osteoclasts may therefore only 
play a minor role. Although in the absente of complex-specific 
antibodies to aJ3, no direct evidente was obtained for the iden- 
tity of the receptor mediating adhesion to collagen in the adhe- 
sion studies, we did demonstrate the importante of cy#, in the 
recognition of native type 1 collagen in the biochemical analyses. 
Whether the discrepancy in the amount of PI, compared to 01~ 
precipitated is due to association of part of the p, subunit with (Y, 
is yet to be definitively established. The OI,,~, integrin bas pre- 
viously been demonstrated at low levels on osteoclasts,” and has been reported to have collagen binding properties,” hut tn thc 
present study we have not been able to provide any direct cvi- 
dence for a role of oc$, in osteoclast interaction with collagen. 
Interestingly, denatured collagen was recognized predomi- 
nantly by Ds. rather than PI integrins. In the affinity chromatog- 
raphy and receptor binding assays. involvement of both p, and 
p3 was observed; however, it is conceivable that. at least in thc 
affinity chromatography studies. some renaturation of denatured 
collagen may have occurred during column preparation resulting 
in an overestimate of the involvement of p, integrins. In the short 
adhesion assays with rat osteoclasts, renaturation of collagen is 
less likely. because here both coating and adhesion were per- 
formed at 37°C and here p, had very little inhibitory effect. The 
ability to recognize native VS denatured protein using different 
sets of receptors has also been reported in other cel] types.‘2.2’,J’ 
and potentially may allow osteoclasts to react to a change in 
microenvironment. This may be of importante in the context of 
bone resorption where degradation of the organic matrix by re- 
sorbing osteoclasts may generate collagen fragments some of 
which have lost their triple helical conformation and may occupy 
and saturate <y,,& on osteoclasts. The extent to which such 
mechanisms may operate in vivo remains to be tested, but on the 
basis of earlier work we would expect that high-leve1 occupancy 
of VNR by soluble ligand would result in retraction of osteo- 
clasts and cessation of bone resorption.‘7~‘x~‘5 whereas binding 
of immobilized substrate wil1 allow osteoclasts to adhere, change 
into a polarized cel], and become able to resorb bone. 
Collagen fibers clearly revealed recognition by l3, and 6; 
integrin and only combinations of p, (or oZ) and p3 antibodies 
could completely abolish adhesion. This may suggest that the 
collagen quaternary (fibrous) structure is critical for binding by 
native (triple-helical) collagen of the 0lJ3~ integrin, although we 
cannot rule out completely that recognition of p, integrin by 
fibers involves a trace noncollagenous constituent in the fibers. 
Apart from type 1 collagen, other collagen types (types 1-V 
tested, all found positive) were shown to be adhesive substrates 
for osteoclasts, although the adhesive mechanism was not inves- 
tigated further. Adhesion to type 11 collagen may have relevante 
as this is the predominant collagen in cartilage matrix, which. 
when mineralized. can be resorbed by osteoclasts. Type IV co- 
lagen wil1 be encountered in endothelial basement membranes 
during dissemination of osteoclast progenitors, smal1 amounts of 
type V collagen are present in bone matrix.” and type 111 col- 
lagen may be encountered by osteoclasts and precursors in the 
periosteum. 
Clear differences were observed in the spreading of osteo 
clasts on different substrates. Native collagen did not allow 
spreading to the extent of serum (vitronectin). or other substrates 
recognized by CK&~~ Denatured collagen, on the contrary, al- 
lowed osteoclasts to spread better, suggesting that a,& rather 
than rx$, is important for this cellular activity. This would be in 
agreement with earlier reports on different roles for & and p, 
integrins in other cel1 types.‘“.‘5 Thus, one may hypothesize that 
initial osteoclast recognition of native collagen is weak, utilizes 
p, integrin, and requires the participation of additional interac- 
tions between noncollagenous botte proteins and u,p3, Later, 
during the resorptive phase of osteoclast activity when collagen 
is digested (and in part presenting in an equivalent form to de- 
natured collagen), osteoclast adhesion to, and spreading on. 
modified collagen may involve recruitment and participation of 
oyp2. Such a shift in receptor usage could conceivably be linked 
to modifications of cellular behavior. as suggested above. ln this 
respect it is interesting to note that. in initial experiments on 
calcium signaling in rat osteoclasts challenged with tnonomeric 
Bone Vol. 19, No. 4 M. H. Helfrich et al. 
October 1996:317-328 p1 integrins and osteoclast function 327 
type 1 collagen in solution, osteoclasts responded with an in- 
crease in intranuclear calcium, similar in localization to the re- 
sponse seen with shot? syntbetic RGD-containing peptides,49 al- 
though with slower kinetics. Increases in [Ca’+], have also been 
reported after binding of collagen to mononuclear cells,39 with 
no change after binding of fibronectin. The physiological conse- 
quences of Ca” signaling in osteoclasts mediated via collagen 
(or indeed RGD peptides) remain to be established and are cur- 
rently under investigation. 
We have not been able to gain conclusive information about 
the recognition site for osteoclast <y2pI in type 1 collagen. RGD 
sites in native type 1 (and other) collagens are clearly recognized 
by osteoclasts as adhesion is inhibited by RGD-containing pep- 
tides. This RGD sensitivity of collagen adhesion, together with 
the RGD sensitivity of VNR-mediated adhesion of osteoclasts to 
bone matrix proteins, could explain the very potent inhibition of 
bone resorption seen with RGD-containing peptides.25 RGD- 
sensitivity of <yaH adhesion to collagen, however, contrasts with 
earlier reports of RGD-independent collagen recognition’4’33 but 
supports findings by others in different cel1 types.’ It remains to 
be resolved if this observed functional differente in oZH1 behav- 
ior in osteoclasts relates to the activation state of the integrin in 
osteoclasts, an effect known to have a profound consequente 
upon ligand recognition in other systems,6.32 or is somehow re- 
lated to osteoclast plasma membrane composition, another factor 
known to influence ligand recognition by integrins.” 
In conclusion, we have shown that /3i integrins, in particular 
a,&, in addition to p3 integrins, play an important part in mam- 
malian osteoclast function. Our results contrast with those re- 
ported previously for avian osteoclasts, which do not recognize 
type 1 collagen and use pi integrin (a$,) to adhere to fibronec- 
tin.46 Although inhibition of bone resorption by pi antibodies 
may involve direct effects on osteoclasts and indirect effects 
mediated through osteoblasts, or other P,-expressing cel1 types 
present in bone and bone marrow, inhibition by o2 antibodies 
would seem to involve mainly direct effects on osteoclasts, given 
the restricted expression of <y2 in bone cells3’ (this study also). 
Our results demonstrate that osteoclasts adhere to native type 1 
collagen via 0213,, but use a,H3 to bind to denatured collagen. 
The mechanism of recognition of native collagen is yet to be 
fully characterized and, in particular, the collagen binding site 
wil1 need to be defined as it seems to differ from that utilized by 
platelets. 
Acknowledgments: This study was supported by grants from the Imperia1 
CancerResearchFund,UK,toM.H.H.,S.A.N.,G.S.,andM.A.H.M.J.B. 
is supported by the MRC. The authors mank Dr. K. Stewart, Dr. K. 
Rubin, Dr. D. Turner, and Dr. F. Watt for donations of antisera; Dr. L. 
Fisher and Dr. J. Spragg for donation of osteopontin and laminin, re- 
spectively; and Dr. P. Bornstein and Dr. H. Sage for rat collagen CB 
fragments. 
References 
1. Amiot, M., Bernard, A., Tran, H. C. Leca, G., Kanellopoulos, J. M., and 
Boumsell, L. The human cel1 surface glycoprotein complex (gpl20,200) rec- 
ognized by monoclonal antibody K20 is a component binding to phytohae- 
magglutinin on T cells. Stand J Immunol 23:109-228; 1986. 
2. Amett, T. and Dempster, D. Effect of pH on bene resorption by rat osteoclasts 
in vitro. Endocrinology 119:119-124; 1986. 
3. Bl&, H. C. and Schelesinger, P. H. The mechanism of osteoclast acidification. 
Ritkin, B. R. and Gay, C. V., Eds. Biology and physiology of the osteoclast. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC; 1992;259-287. 
4. Bodary, S. C., Napier, M., and McLean, J. W. Expression of recombinant plate- let glycoprotein II,UI, results in a functional tïbrinogen-binding complex. J 
Bio1 Chem 264:18859-18862; 1989. 
5. Cardarelli, P. M., Yamagata, S., Taguchi, 1.. Gorcsan, F., Chiang, S. L., and 
Lobl, T. The collage” receptor a2B1, from MG-63 and HT1080 cells, interacts 
with a cyclic RGD peptide. J Bio1 Chem 267:23159-23164; 1992. 
6. Chan, B. M. C., and Hemler, M. E. Multiple farms of the integrin VLA-2 can 
be derived from a single 012 cDNA clone: interconversions of farms by an 
anti-Bl antibody. J Cel1 Bio1 120:537-543; 1993. 
7. Chambers, T. J., Fuller, K., Darby, J. A., Pringle, J. A. S., and Horton, M. A. 
Monoclonal antibodies against osteoclasts inhibit bone resorption in vitro. 
Botte Miner 1:127-135; 1986. 
8. Chuntharapai, A., Bodary, S., Horton, M., and Kim, K. J. Blocking monoclonal 
antibodies to uVB3 integrin: a unique epitope of a oVB3 integrin is present on 
hnman osteoclasts. Exp Cel1 Res 205:345-352; 1993. 
9. Clover J., Dodds, R. A., and Gowen, M. Integrin subunit expression by human 
osteoblasts and osteoclasts in sim and in culture. J Cel1 Sci 103:267-271; 1992. 
10. Clyman, R.I., Mauray, F., and Kramer, R. H. Bl and B3 integrins have dif- 
ferent roles in the adhesion and migration of vascular smooth muscle cells on 
extracellular matrix. Exp Cel1 Res 200:272-284; 1992. 
ll. Conforti, G., Zanetti, A., Pasquali-Ronchetti, L, Quaglino, D., Neyroz, P., 
Dejana, E. Modulation of vitronectin receptor binding by membrane lipid com- 
position. J Bio1 Chem 265:40114019; 1991. 
12. Davis, G. E. Affinity of integrins for damaged extracellular matrix: cwBs binds 
to denatured collagen type 1 through RGD sites. Biochem Biophys Res Comm 
182:1025-1031; 1992. 
13. Dedhar, S. and Gray, V. Isolation of a novel integrin receptor mediating Arg- 
Gly-Asp-directed cel1 adhesion to tïbronectin and type 1 collagen from human 
neuroblastoma cells. Association of a “0x1 Bl-related subunit with ov. J Cel1 
Bio1 110:2185-2193; 1990. 
14. Elices, M. J. and Hemler, M. E. The human integrin VLA-2 is a collage” 
receptor on some cells and a collagen/laminin receptor on ethers. Proc Nat1 
Acad Sci USA 8699069910; 1989. 
15. Fisher, J. E., Cautïeld, M. P., Sato, M., Quartuccio, H. A., Gould, R. J., Garsky, 
V. M., Rodan, G. A., and Rosenblatt, M. Inhibition of osteoclastic bone re- 
sorption in vivo by echistatin, an “arginyl-glycyl-aspartyl” (RGD)-containing 
protein. Endocrinology 132:1411-1413; 1993. 
16. Fitzsimmons, C. M. and Bames, M. J. The platelet reactivity of the a2(1)-chain 
of type 1 collage”. Platelet aggregation induced by polymers of the molecule 
[u2(1)],. Thromb Res 39:523-531; 1985. 
17. Fitzsimmons, C. M., Cawston, T. E., and Barnes, M. J. The platelet reactivity 
of collagen type 1: evidente for multiple platelet-reactive sites in the type 1 
collagen molecule. Thromb Haemostasis 56:95-99; 1986. 
18. Flores, M. E., Norgard, M., Heinegtid, D., Reinholt F. P., and Andersson, G. 
RGD-directed attachment of isolated rat osteoclasts to osteopontin, botte sia- 
loprotein and tïbronectin. Exp Cel1 Res 201:526530; 1992. 
19. Gronowicz, G. A. and DeRome M. E. Synthetic peptide containing Arg-Gly- 
Asp inhibits botte formation and resorption in a mineralizing organ culture 
system of fetal rat parietal bones. J Bone Miner Res 9:193-201; 1994. 
20. Gullberg, D., Turner, D. C., Borg, T. K., Terracio, L., and Rubin, K. Different 
Bl-integrin collagen receptors on rat hepatocytes and cardiac fibroblasts. Exp 
Cel1 Res 190:254264; 1990. 
21. Gullberg, D., Gehlsen, K. R., Turner, D. C., Ahlén, K., Zijenah, L. S., Barnes, 
M. J., and Rubin, K. Analysis of olB1, a2Bl and o3Bl integtins in cell- 
collagen interactions: identification of conformation dependent alB1 binding 
sites in collagen type 1. EMBO J 11:3865-3873; 1992. 
22. Heineg?rrd, D. and Oldberg, A. Stmcmre and biology of cartilage and bone 
matrix noncollagenons macromolecules. FASEB J 3:2042-2051; 1989. 
23. Helfrich, M. H., Nesbitt, S. A., Dorey, E. L., and Horton, M. A. Rat osteoclasts 
adherc to a wide range of RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) peptide-containing proteins, 
inclnding the botte sialoproteins and fibronectin, via a B3 integrin. J Bene 
Miner Res 7:335-343; 1992. 
24. Helfrich, M. H., Nesbitt, S. A., and Horton, M. A. Integrins on rat osteoclasts: 
characterisation of two monoclonal antibodies (F4 and Fl 1) to rat B3. Bonc 
Miner Res 7:345-351; 1992. 
25. Horton, M. A. and Rodan, G. A. Integtins as therapcntic targets in bone dis- 
case. Horton, M. A., Ed. Adhesion receptors as therapcutic targets. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC; 1996; 223-245. 
26. Horton, M.A., Lewis, D., McNulty, K., Pringle, J. A. S., and Chambers, T. J. 
Monoclonal antibodies to osteoclastomas (giant cel1 bone tumors): detïnition of 
osteoclast-specitïc cellnlar antigens. Cancer Res 45:5663-5669; 1985. 
27. Hotton, M.A., Taylor, M. L., Amett, T. R., and Helfrich, M. H. Arg-Gly-Asp 
(RGD) peptides and the anti-vitronectin receptor antibody 23C6 inhibit cel1 
328 M. H. Helfrich et al 
PI integrins and ostcoclast functm 
28 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. qpreading and dentine reaorptmn by osteoclasts. Exp Cel1 Ru 195:36X--373; 
1991 
Horton, M. A., Dorey. E. L., Nesbitt, S. A., Samanen. J.. Ah. F. E., Stadel, 
J. M., Nichols, A.. Greig. R.. and Helfrich, M. H. Modulation of vitronectin 
receptor-mediated osteoclast adhesion by Arg-Gly-Asp peptide analogs: a 
structure-function analysis. J Box Miner Res 8:239-247; 1993. 
Horton. M. A., Spragg, J. H.. Bodary, S. C., and Helfrich, M. H. Recogmtion of 
cryptic sites in human and mouse laminins by rat osteoclaats is mediated by & 
and p, integrins. Bene 15:639-646; 1994. 
Hughes. D. E., Salter. D. M Dedhar, S.. and Simpson. R. Integrm expression 
in human bene. J Bone Miner Res 8527-533: 1993. 
Kmg, K.L.. D’Anza. J. J., Bodary, S., Pitti, R., Siegel, M.. Lazarus, R. A., 
Denms, M. S.. Hammond~. R. G., Jr., and Kukreja, S. C. The effects of kistrin 
on bone resorptmn in vitro and serum calcium in vivo. J Bone Miner Res 
9:381-387: 1994 
Kirchhofer, D., Languino. L. R.. Ruoslahti, E.. and Pierschbacher. M. D. oi2pl 
Integtins from different cel1 types show different binding specificitier. J Bio1 
Chem 265:6 IS-6 18; 1990. 
Kramer, R. H. and Marks. N Identification of integrin collagen receptora on 
human melanoma cells. J Bio1 Chem 264:46844688; 1989. 
Lakkakorpi, P. T., Tuukanen, J.. Hentunen, T., Järvelin, K., and Väänänen, 
H. K. Organiration of osteoclast microfilaments dwing the attachment to bone 
surface in vitro. J Bone Miner Res 4:817-825; 1989. 
Lakkakorpi, P. T.. Horton. M. A., Helfrich, M. H., Karhukorpi. E.-K.. and 
Väänanen, H. K. Vitronectin receptor has a role in bone resorption but does not 
mediate tight sealing zone attachment of osteoclasts to the bone surface. J Cel1 
Bio1 115:1179-1186: 1991. 
Lakkakorpi, P. T., Helfiich. M. H., Horton, M. A., and Väänänen, H. K. Spatial 
orgamsation of microfïlaments and vitronectin receptor, ave3, in osteoclasts. A 
study using confocal laser scanning microscopy. J Cel1 Sci 104:663-670; 1993. 
Marchisio. P. C.. Cirillo, D.. Naldini, L., Primavera. M. V , Teti. A., Zambonin- 
Zallone. A. Cell-substratum interaction of cultured avian osteoclasts is medi- 
ated by specific adhesion structures. J Cel1 Bio1 99:169&1705: 1984. 
Masarachia. P.. Yamamoto. M.. Rodan, G. A.. and Duong, L. T. Co- 
localization of the vitronectin receptor w@3 and echistatin in osteoclasts dur- 
ing bone resorption. J Bone Miner Res IO(supp1 I):Sl64; 1995. 
Menon, R. P.. Pilla, S., and Sudhakaran, P. R. Binding of collagen causes 
mtracellular mobiliration of calcium in human mononuclear cells. Biochem 
Mol Bio1 Int 3 I :833-840; 1993. 
Mendrick. D. L and Kelly. D. M. Tempora1 expression of VLA-2 and modu- 
lation of its ligand binding specificity by rat glomemlar epithelial cells in vitro. 
Lab Invest 69:690-702, 199 1. 
41. Neff, L., Gailit. J.. and Baron. R. Ultrastructural demonstration of the cw 
subunit of the vitronectin receptor in the aealing zone of resorbing osteoclasts. 
J Bone Miner Res lO(supp1 I ):S329: 1995 
42. Nesbitt, S. and Horton, M. Non-radioactive biochemical characterization of 
membrane proteins usmg enhanced chemiluminescence. Anal Biochem 
2061267-272: 1992. 
43. Nesbitt, S., Nesbit, A.. Helfrich M., and Horton, M. Biochermcal characteriza- 
tion of human osteoclast integrins. Bio1 Chem 268:16737-16745; 1993. 44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
SI 
52 
53 
54 
55. Bene Vol. 19, No. 4 
October 1996:317-X8 
Pfaff. M Aumallley. M., Speck\, C., Knolle. J.. Zewe\, H G.. and Ilmpl. R 
Integrin and Arg-Gly-Asp dependence of cel1 adhesion to the native and un- 
folded triple helix of collagen type Vl. Exp Cel1 Rei 206: 167-176: 1993. 
Reinholt, F. P.. Hultenby. K Oldberg. À.. and Heinegrd, D. Oateopontln-a 
possible anchor of osteoclasts to bene. Prut Nat1 Acad Sci USA 87:4473-4475. 
1990. 
Ross. F. l”., Chappel, J.. Alvarer, J. 1 < Sander. D.. Butler, W. T.. Farach- 
Carwn, M.C., Mintz, K. A.. Gehron-Robey, P., Teltelbaum, S. L.. and 
Cheresh. D A. Interactions between the bone matrix proteins osteopontin and 
bene aialoprotein and the orteoclast inteprin ave3 potentiate bone resorption. 
J Bio1 Chem 268:9901-9907: 1993. 
Ryder. M. 1.. Jenkina. S. D and Honon, J. E. The adherente to bone by cy- 
toplasmlc elements of osteoclasts. J Dwt Res 60:1349-1355; 1981. 
Sato, M., Sardana. M. K., Grasser. W A.. Garsky, V. M., Murray, 1. M., and 
Gould, R. J. Echistatin is a potent inhibitor of bene resorption in culture. J Cell 
Bio1 I Il:l713-1723; 1990. 
Shankar. G., Dwlron. 1.. Helfrich. M. H.. Mason W. T., and Horton, M.A. 
lntegrin receptor-mediated mobilisation of intranuclear calcium in rat osteo- 
clast\. J Cel1 Sci 105:61-68: 1993. 
Staatr. W. D., Fok, K. F.. Zutter, M.M., Adams, S. P.. Rodrigues, B. A.. and 
Santoro. S. A. Identification of a tetrapeptide recognition sequence for the 
rr?pl integrin for collage”. J Bio1 Chem 266:7363-7367: 1991, 
Steuart. K. N.. Roy-Chaudhury, P.. Lunsden, L., Jones, M.C., Brown, 
P A. J.. MacLeod, A.M.. Haites. N. E., Simpson, J G.. and Power, D. A. 
Monoclonal antibodies to cultured human glomerulw mesangial cells. 1. Re- 
activity with haemopoietic cells and normal kidney sectioni. J Pathol 163:265- 
272; 1991 
Taylor, M. L.. Boyde. A., and Jones, S. J. The effect of fluonde on the patterns 
of adherente of osteoclasts cultured on and resorbing dentine: a 3-D assessment 
of vinculin-labelled cells using confocal optica1 microscopy. Anat Embryo1 
180:427-435; 1989. 
Vaanänen, H. K. and Horton, M. A. The osreoclast clear zone is a specialized 
cell-extracellular matnx adhesion structure. J Cel1 Sci 108:2729-2732; 1995. 
Zambonin-Zallone, A., Teti, A., Grano, M.. Rubinacci, A., Abbadini, M., 
Gaboh, M., and Mwchisio. P. C. Immunocytochenucal distribution of exua- 
cellular matrix receptors in human osteoclasts: B3 integrin colocalized with 
vinculin and talin in the podosomu of osteoclastoma giant cells. Exp Cel1 Res 
182:64S-652: 1989. 
Zambruno. G., Marchisio, P. C., Mechiori. A.. Bondanza, S., Cancedda, R., and 
De Luca, M. Expression of integrin receptors and their role in adhesion, spread- 
mg and migratmn of normal human melanocytes. J Cel1 Sci 105:179-190; 
1993 
Date Rrceivrd: January 30, 1996 
Bate Revised: May 3, 1996 
Date Ampted: June 7, 1996 
