Stromelysin-1 (MMP-3) and Stromelysin-2 (MMP-10)
Expression in Developing Human Bone: Potential Roles inSkeletal Development
S. BORD,1,3A. HORNER,1R. M. HEMBRY,2and J. E. COMPSTON1
1Department of Medicine University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, UK
2Strangeways Research Laboratory, Cambridge, UK
3Anglia Polytechnic University, Cambridge, UK
Stromelysin, a member of the matrix metalloproteinase fam-ily,demonstrateswidesubstratespecificitywiththeabilitytodegrade proteoglycan, fibronectin, laminin, casein, and thenonhelical region of collagen. The two forms of stromelysin(SL),types1(MMP-3)and2(MMP-10),share82%sequencehomology, but exhibit differences in cellular synthesis andinducibility by cytokines and growth factors in vitro. How-ever,thedistributionofthetwoisoformsinbonehasnotbeenreported. We investigated the presence of SL-1 and SL-2 inhuman osteophytic and neonatal rib bone using immunohis-tochemistry and, combined with a new method of in situzymography, determined the activity of the immunolocalizedstromelysins. Latent SL-1 was strongly expressed in theextracellular matrix in fibrous tissue surrounding areas ofendochondral ossification in osteophytes, and adjacent to theperiosteum of fetal rib bone. Active SL-1 expression wasdetected in osteocytes and the matrix surrounding osteocyticlacunae. SL-2 showed intense cell-associated staining at sitesof resorption in areas of endochondral ossification and inresorptive cells at the chondro-osseous junction, which cor-relatedwithenzymeactivitydetectedbyzymography.Withinthe rib, active SL-2 expression was localized in chondrocytesof the growth plate, whereas only occasional SL-1 signal wasevident. Vascular areas showed strong SL-2 staining withsome proteolytic activity. SL-2, but not SL-1, was stronglyexpressed in osteoclasts and most mononuclear cells withinthe marrow. At sites of bone formation both isoforms wereexpressed by osteoblasts with SL-1 also present in osteoid.These results demonstrate, for the first time, the differentialexpression of SL-1 and SL-2 in developing human bone,indicating specific roles for the two isoforms. In situ zymog-raphy demonstrates that SL-2 is produced in an active formwith associated degradation, whereas SL-1, in a matrix-bound proenzyme form, may act as a reservoir for lateractivation.(Bone23:7–12;1998) ©1998byElsevierScienceInc. All rights reserved.
Key Words: Metalloproteinases; Stromelysin; Bone; Osteo-
blasts; Osteoclasts; Chondrocytes.Introduction
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of endopepti-
dases that degrade extracellular matrix and basement membranecomponents. They are synthesized and secreted by multiple celltypes in a proform requiring extracellular activation, and theiractivity is tightly regulated by specific inhibitors (TIMPs). Thereis much evidence to suggest that these enzymes and their inhib-itors play important roles both in normal developmental pro-cesses and pathological degradation.
18
MMPsfallintothreemaingroupsaccordingtotheirsubstrate
specificity: the collagenases (MMP-1, -8, and -13) cleave nativecollagens types I, II, and III at a single locus; the gelatinases(MMP-2and-9)cleavedenaturedcollagensandtypeIV;andthestromelysins (MMP-3 and -10) have a broad substrate specificityincluding proteoglycans, types III, IV, and V collagens, casein,and fibronectin.
2
Stromelysin-1 (SL-1, MMP-3) and stromelysin-2 (SL-2,
MMP-10) are closely related, the two isoforms sharing 82%sequence homology
23; however, their expression appears to be
differently regulated. SL-1 was initially isolated from rabbitsynovial fibroblasts
9and SL-2 identified in a human adenocar-
cinoma cDNA library.17SL-1 production is stimulated in many
cell types by growth factors, cytokines, tumor promoters, andoncogenes, whereas SL-2 appears to be largely unaffected bythese agents. In vitro studies have shown that SL-1 is producedby stimulated human
16and mouse osteoblasts,24two osteosar-
coma cell lines (MG63 and U2OS),21and isolated rabbit oste-
oclasts.14We have reported the presence, in situ, of SL-1 in
human osteoblasts, but not osteoclasts.4
Immunohistochemistry, although demonstrating the presence
of MMP protein, is restricted by currently available antibodiesthat do not differentiate between latent and proteolytically activeforms of the enzyme nor between the free and inhibitor-com-plexed enzyme. We have used in situ substrate zymography todemonstrate latent and active SL-1 and SL-2 in human osteo-phytic and neonatal rib bone.
Materials and Methods
TissueThe study was conducted on neonatal ribs and osteophytes.
Neonatalribswereremovedatpostmortem(28–37wkgestation)and osteophytes were obtained following routine shoulder andhip joint replacement surgery. Informed written consent was
Address for correspondence and reprints: Dr. Sharyn Bord, Department
of Medicine, Level 5, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge CB2 2QQ,UK. E-mail: sb201@cam.ac.uk
Bone Vol. 23, No. 1
July 1998:7–12
7 © 1998 by Elsevier Science Inc. 8756-3282/98/$19.00
All rights reserved. PII S8756-3282(98)00064-7
given and approval obtained from the local ethics committee.
Following removal the tissue was immediately placed on ice andthen immersed in 5% polyvinylalcohol (PVA) for 2 min, snapfrozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at 270°C. Frozen sections
were obtained using a Bright cryostat (Huntingdon, UK) with acabinet temperature of 230°C, equipped with a slow-drive high-
torque motor with automatic speed control and a highly polishedtungsten carbide knife.
Histology
Undecalcified, unfixed 9- mm-thick frozen sections were stained
with Diff-Quik (Baxter Dade AG) or 1% toluidine blue forgeneral morphology, and von Kossa with a van Geisen counter-staintoassessmatrixmineralization.Alkalinephosphatasestain-ing to identify osteoblasts was detected using a coupled reactionwith a-naphthyl acid phosphate and fast red TR.
6Tartrate-
resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) staining in osteoclasts andpreosteoclasts was demonstrated by reactivity with AS-BI phos-phate and sodium tartrate, postcoupled with fast garnet.
15
Antibodies
Well-characterized specific polyclonal antibodies to human
SL-11and human SL-213were raised in sheep. Because the
antiserum to SL-1 partially cross reacts with SL-21additional
precautions were taken to remove cross-reacting epitopes. Thepeptide to which the SL-2 antibody was raised was combinedwiththeantibodytoeitherSL-1,SL-2,orNSS(overnightat4°C)in a concentration range of 0–100 mg/mL and then used to stain
sections as described below. The immunoglobulin (IgG) concen-trations of the antisera were maintained at 10 mg/mL in all
preparations.
Immunoglobulins for the antisera were prepared by triple
ammoniumsulfateprecipitation.PoolednormalsheepserumIgG(NSS) was used as a control. A biotinylated rabbit antisheep IgG(Vector Laboratories) was used as secondary antibody.
Immunohistochemistry
Sets of serial sections 9 mm thick were picked off onto glass
slides,coatedwith2%3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane(APES),airdried for 10 min, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 22 min atroom temperature, and washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS).
Immunolocalization was carried out using an indirect immuno-
peroxidasesystem.Endogenousperoxidaseandnonspecificbindingwere blocked by incubation with ImmunoPure peroxidase suppres-sor(Pierce,22min)andextensivewashingfollowedby20%normalrabbit serum (12 min) prior to the primary antibody incubation (10mg/mL, overnight at 4°C in a humid chamber). Following further
washingthesecondantibodywasapplied(5 mg/mL,40minatroom
temperature). The sections were washed and the signal amplifiedusing the avidin-biotin complex (ABC Vector Laboratories) for 30min at room temperature. Sites of antigen binding were visualizedusing3,3 9-diaminobenzidine(DAB)asachromogen.Somesections
were lightly counterstained with hematoxylin or methylgreen todetect nuclei. Sections were mounted in aqueous mount (90%glycerol in PBS) and observed under bright-field microscopy on anOlympus BH-2 microscope. Photographs were taken using Ekta-chrome 64 film.
Substrate Gels
Substrate gels were prepared using an adaptation of the method of
Galis et al.
12FITC-labeled casein (Sigma, 1 mg/mL in distilled
water) was mixed 1:1 with a solution of 1% agarose melted in 50mmol/LTris(pH7.2)containing10mmol/LCaClandkeptat56°C
in a dipping chamber. Prewarmed microscope slides were dippedinto the casein solution, drained for a few seconds, and allowed togel horizontally at room temperature. Prior to use, the slides wereexamined by fluorescence microscopy to insure there was an evencoating of casein over the slide. Cryosections were picked off ontothe slides, covered with 80 mL of Tris buffer at pH 7.2, 6.8, or 6.0,
and incubated at 37°C for 16–20 h. Using fluorescence microscopyareas of lysis were identified as dark areas within the fluorescentcoating and compared with SL-1 and SL-2 expression observed onserial sections by immunohistochemistry. To confirm that the lysiswas due to MMP activity, some sections were treated with 1,10-phenanthrolineor1mmol/LEDTA,zincchelatorsthatinhibitMMPactivity.
Results
Addition of the SL-2 peptide to the SL-2 antibody dose-depen-
dently abolished staining, confirming its specificity. When thepeptide was added to the SL-1 antibody a slight reduction instaining at the higher concentrations was observed, consistentwith a weak interaction with SL-2.
1NSS with peptide was
negative at all concentrations.
Osteophytic Bone
Histological features. The osteophytes exhibited histological
features similar to those reported by ourselves4,5and others.10,20
Vascular invasion was associated with the appearance of anarrow fibrocartilage outer collar, containing collagenous fiberswithcartilagecellsandscantcartilagematrix.This,togetherwithan outer layer of fibrous tissue, surrounded the osteophyte(Figure 1a). A central area with bone formation and resorption
was present, with mineralized bone and thick osteoid seams.Both endochondral and intramembranous bone formation wereevident, as were woven and mature lamellar bone.
Immunolocalization. Serial sections were assessed for SL-1
and SL-2 expression. Normal sheep serum, as detailed in Mate-
rials and Methods , was used as a negative control. In addition,
omission of the primary or secondary antibodies was included todetect nonspecific binding of the second antibody or substrate.All these showed absence of staining (Figure 1b).
Stromelysin-1. Within osteophytic bone stromelysin-1 was
most evident as matrix-associated staining in the immature fi-brous tissue (Figure 1c) and cartilage adjacent to areas of boneformation, with occasional cell-associated expression in hyper-trophic chondrocytes. Sections stained with anti-SL-1 absorbedwith SL-2 peptide also showed staining at these sites confirmingthe presence of SL-1. No expression was seen in vascular cells(Figure 1c). Within the bony areas positive staining was mostfrequently detected in osteoid at sites of bone formation. How-ever, only occasional plump osteoblasts at these sites showedexpression of SL-1. Many TRAP-positive osteoclasts were evi-dent but all were negative for SL-1.
Stromelysin-2. Intense SL-2 expression was seen in many cell
types within osteophytic bone. Vascular cells in the fibrocartilagestained strongly (Figure 1d) as did chondrocytes in most areas ofendochondral ossification. Osteoblasts that appeared to be activelyinvolved with synthesis of new osteoid expressed SL-2, particularlythose cells closest to the bone surface, whereas no staining wasdetectedinthematrix.SL-2signalwasseeninmononuclearcellsatsites of resorption and in some, but not all, osteoclasts. The oste-oclasts were identified by morphology and TRAP positivity.8 S. Bord et al. Bone Vol. 23, No. 1
Stromelysin in bone development July 1998:7–12
Substrate gels. Areas of lysis were evident on most sections.
These areas were compared with the serial sections on whichimmunolocalization for SL-1 and SL-2 was performed. Thecorrelation of SL-1 protein expression and lysis was low, but, incontrast, there was a strong correlation between SL-2 expressionand casein lysis. No lysis was detected in areas where intense
matrix-bound SL-1 expression was evident; however, there weredistinct bands of lysis around the SL-2-positive hypertrophicchondrocytes.Manyosteoclastswereevidentandthosethatwereimmunoreactive for SL-2 also showed proteolytic activity on the
Figure 1. Serial sections of osteophytic bone. (a) Low-power view of a section stained with Diff-Quik shows the vascular cartilage (V) and fibrous
tissue (F) adjacent to the bone (B). (b–d) Sections stained by indirect immunoperoxidase with DAB as a chromogen using (b) NSS IgG, (c) anti-SL-1IgG,and(d)anti-SL-2IgG.(b)Low-powerviewofacontrolsectionimmunolocalizedwithNSSIgG.Nodetectablestainingisseeninanyoftheareas.(c)Higherpowerviewofsectionstainedwithanti-SL-1IgGshowingboxedareain(b).Intensematrix-boundSL-1expressionisapparentinthefibroustissue,butnostainingisseenstaininginthevasculararea(arrows).(d)Higherpowerviewofadjacentsectionstainedwithanti-SL-2IgGshowsposi tive
expression in many vascular cells (arrows), but absence of staining in the fibrous tissue. Bars 550mm (a–d).
Figure 2. Serial sections of neonatal rib stained by indirect immunoperoxidase with (a) anti-SL-1 IgG and (b–d) anti-SL-2 and detected with DAB
substrate. (a) A chondro-osseous junction with periosteum (P) and loosely woven bone (B) adjacent to chondrocytes (arrows). Matrix-associated SL- 1
staining is seen in the periosteum, whereas the chondrocytes are negative. (b) Distinct cell-associated SL-2 signal is detected in the chondrocytes(arrows) and there is low expression in cells of the periosteal covering (arrowheads). (c) An osteoclast (arrow) close to the bone surface (B) in theprimary spongiosa exhibits strong SL-2 expression. Methylgreen counterstain demonstrates the nuclei of the osteoclast and surrounding cells(arrowheads). (d) Osteoblasts at a bone forming surface are immunoreactive for SL-2. The cells closest to the bone (B) show the most intense signal(arrows). Bars 520mm (a–d).9 Bone Vol. 23, No. 1 S. Bord et al.
July 1998:7–12 Stromelysin in bone development
casein substrate. Vascular cells showed immunoreactive SL-2
signal with associated proteolysis in about 20% of these positivecells, indicating there may be selective activity at the samelocation.
Neonatal Rib
Histological features. Serial sections were cut both longitudi-
nally and cross sectionally through the rib samples. Longitudinalsections showed the growth plate enveloped by a periostealcollar.
Stromelysin-1. Stromelysin-1 expression in the rib was less
pronounced than in osteophytic bone. Staining was predomi-nately matrix-associated, particularly at the chondro-osseousjunction where the loosely woven bone and connective tissuestained strongly. Most samples showed some immunoreactiveSL-1 in the periosteum, particularly in the area close to thechondro-osseous junction ( Figure 2a). Only occasional staining
was observed in the chondrocytes. Some osteoblasts on trabec-ularsurfacesshowedpositivesignal,whereasallosteoclastswerenegative. Many osteocytes stained positively, particularly thoseclose to remodeling surfaces.
Stromelysin-2. Intense SL-2 signal was evident in the hyper-
trophic region of the growth plate, but decreased through theproliferative zone, with only low levels in the resting chondro-cytes. Toward the chondro-osseous junction that surrounded thecartilage, the hypertrophic chondrocytes at the peripheral edgeshowed intense signal (Figure 2b). Cell-associated expressionwas seen in the cells of the perichondrium and the periosteum(Figure 2b). Within the primary spongiosa cartilage remnantswere remodeled by osteoclasts, some of which expressed SL-2(Figure2c).Alkalinephosphatase-positiveosteoblastsassociatedwith areas of new bone formation were immunoreactive forSL-2,withthosecellsclosesttotheosteoidbonesurfacestainingmost intensely (Figure 2d).
Substrate gels. Sections of neonatal rib on the casein sub-
strate gel gave very similar results to the osteophyte sections.Proliferating and hypertrophic chondrocytes with intense SL-2expression ( Figure 3a) also showed rings of lysis (Figure 3b).
Sectionstreatedwithethylene-diaminetetra-aceticacid(EDTA),an inhibitor of MMP activity, showed no degradation of thecasein substrate (Figure 3c). Osteoblasts in areas of bone forma-tion were also SL-2 positive with associated lysis. Marked lysiswasalsodetectedatsitesofresorptionbothintheosteophyteandin the chondro-osseous junction in the rib, where sites of lysiscolocalized with the cell-associated SL-2 signal.
Osteoclasts close to the bone surface were negative for SL-1
(Figure 3d), but strongly positive for SL-2 (Figure 3e), anddemonstrated areas of lysis that became more distinct when thesections were incubated in lower pH buffer, the greatest amountof lysis around the osteoclasts being observed at pH 6.0 (Figure3f). The addition of 1,10-phenanthroline or EDTA blocked mostof the lysis at all pH values (Figure 3g).
No lysis was observed in association with SL-1 signal in the
matrix. Lysis did occur in some osteocytes and correlated withSL-1 but not SL-2 expression (Figure 3h, i).
Discussion
These results demonstrate, for the first time, the differential
expressionofSL-1andSL-2indevelopinghumanbone.Theuseof in situ zymography enabled distinction of active and inactivestromelysin, and demonstrated that immunoreactive SL-2 waslargely active, whereas SL-1 was predominately latent and
matrix bound.
These results extend our earlier work that described the
expression of MMPs and TIMP in human osteophytic bone; inthat study, the presence of only the SL-1 isoform was investi-gated.
5Osteophytic bone provides a model of rapid bone turn-
over, in which endochondral ossification, vascular invasion,cellular proliferation, and new bone formation are seen, resem-bling the changes seen in the epiphyseal growth plate of longbones. However, it is pathological bone and so, in the presentstudy, neonatal rib was included as an example of developingnormal human bone. In both tissues, the patterns of immunolo-calization of both SL-1 and SL-2 were very similar; however,generally, the intensity of staining was higher in the osteophytesthanintheribs,possiblyreflectingthegreaterrateofactivityandgrowth in osteophytic bone. Some interesting differences be-tween SL-1 and SL-2 have been highlighted, which suggestsdiffering functional roles for the two isoforms.
Currently, the antibodies available for detection of MMPs
do not distinguish between active, latent, or inhibitor-com-plexed forms, and therefore it is only possible to speculate onthe function of these enzymes in bone. Electrophoretic tech-niques using gelatin and casein zymography are used todemonstrateactivegelatinaseandstromelysin.However,sam-ples can only be derived from culture media, or cell or tissuehomogenates, and thus do not provide in situ information.Similarly, fluorogenic peptides and fluorescent-labeled pro-teins can be used to identify active protein, but again, arerestricted to prepared samples.
Both SL-1 and SL-2 were present in osteoblasts on bone
formingsurfaces,althoughthenumberofSL-1-positivecellswaslower, and the expression more variable than SL-2, with SL-2staining most pronounced in the cells closest to the bone surface.Stromelysin has been shown to cleave types I and III procolla-gens,
19and osteoblastic SL-2 may play a role in degrading these
procollagens and facilitating collagen fibril orientation prior tomineralization.
Immunoreactive SL-1 was incorporated in the osteoid on
bonesurfaces.Stromelysinbindstocollagenbothinitslatentandactive form, but TIMP-1 binds only to the active enzyme.
1Our
previous study showed that SL-1 expression in some areas wasaccompanied by low levels of TIMP-1, suggesting the matrix-boundenzymecouldbeeitheractiveorinitslatentproform.Thisis clarified by the current study which showed no lysis of thecasein substrate at these sites, suggesting that the sequesteredmatrix-bound enzyme is latent. The latent form may play a rolein bone resorption, during which it would be released andbecome available for activation. Stromelysin can autoactivate atlow pH,
19and thus it is also possible that the acid environment
of bone resorption could accomplish this activation and enablethe enzyme to activate other local enzymes (e.g., collagenase)and factors stored in bone matrix (e.g., transforming growthfactor- b[TGF- b]) TGF- bexpression has been identified in
similar locations, with the active form localized at sites ofresorption (Horner, unpublished observations). As TGF- bis
known to downregulate MMP synthesis and upregulate TIMP,
27
this could act as a regulatory mechanism for MMP productionand activation. This proposed function must be confined to SL-1as there was no evidence of any matrix-bound SL-2 expression.Although the majority of immunoreactive SL-1 did not correlatewith lysis of the substrate, it is of interest to note that SL-1expression in some osteocytes was associated with proteolyticactivity on the casein substrate.
A difference in the expression patterns between the isoforms
wasseeninosteoclasts.AlthoughtherewasnoevidenceofSL-1,intensestainingofSL-2wasdetectedinsomeosteoclastscloseto10 S. Bord et al. Bone Vol. 23, No. 1
Stromelysin in bone development July 1998:7–12
bone surfaces and associated with lysis of the casein substrate.
Collagenase expression has been demonstrated in human andmouse osteoclasts
3,4and gelatinase B in osteoclasts from many
species,4,14,25,26and thus casein lysis by osteoclasts could pos-
sibly be due to any of these MMPs as well as to other proteolyticenzymes. Incubation of the sections with EDTA, an inhibitor of
MMP activity, prevented lysis, indicating that substrate degra-dation was due to MMP activity. Casein is a known substrate forstromelysin; because the most pronounced lysis occurred at pH6.0 and gelatinase B and collagenase only act at neutral pH it
Figure 3. Serial sections of neonatal rib showing: (a–c) chondrocytes in the growth plate; (d–g) an area of bone (B) with a highly resorbed edge, and
osteoclasts (arrows) in close proximity; (h, i) osteocytes at a remodeling surface. (a) SL-2 expression detected using DAB chromogen is seen in mostof the proliferating chondrocytes (arrowheads), with nuclei demonstrated by a methylgreen counterstain. (b) In situ gel zymography demonstrates t he
proteolytic activity of the chondrocytes. The cells are identified by their autofluorescence and dark areas of lysis in the fluorescent casein subst rate can
be seen in the territorial region of the chondrocytes (asterisk) and, to a lesser extent, in the interterritorial regions (arrowhead). (c) High-powe r view
of a section treated with EDTA, an inhibitor of MMP activity. No lysis in the fluorescent gel coating is visible. The chondrocytes are identifiable bytheir slight autofluorescence (arrow). (d) A section immunolocalized for SL-1 shows no positive signal. (e) Immunoreactive SL-2 is clearlydemonstrated in the osteoclasts (arrows) close to the bone surface. (f) Dark areas of lysis (asterisks) in the fluorescence-labeled casein substrat e
demonstrate proteolytic activity of the osteoclasts. The section was incubated in Tris buffer (pH 6.0). (g) A control section incubated in Tris buffe r (pH
6.0)containingEDTA,aninhibitorofMMPactivity,showsnolysis.(h)SL-1expressionimmunolocalizedinsomeosteocytesandsurroundinglacunae(arrowheads)closetoaremodelingsurface.Osteocytesawayfromthesurfaceshownostaining.(i)Higherpowerviewofboxedareain(h)demonstratesproteolytic lysis of the fluorescent substrate in the osteocytic lacunae (arrowheads). Bars 520mm.11 Bone Vol. 23, No. 1 S. Bord et al.
July 1998:7–12 Stromelysin in bone development
seems likely the observed lysis was due to SL-2. However, other
proteolytic enzymes may also be involved, possibly regulated bychanging pH.
Few human studies, particularly in bone, have investigated
the presence of both SL-1 and SL-2. Saarialho-Kere et al.
22
found that distinct populations of basal keratinocytes expressedstromelysin in chronic wounds from human patients. SL-1 wasimmunolocalized in basal keratinocytes adjacent to but distalfrom the wound edge, whereas SL-2 was seen only in the basalkeratinocytes at the migrating front, suggesting that the twoMMPs may have distinct roles in tissue repair.
SeveralstudieshavedocumentedthepresenceofSL-1inanimal
growth plate chondrocytes,
7,8but the distribution of SL-2 has not
been reported. Edwards et al.11reported the expression of various
MMPs, including SL-1, but not SL-2, in the subarticular zones of7–14-week human fetal limbs and observed low levels, close to thelimit of detection, of SL-1 in chondrocytes. Our finding of onlyoccasional staining in chondrocytes may reflect the different sourceof tissue. In contrast, SL-2 was evident in most chondrocytes withassociated substrate lysis. This lysis was prevented by EDTA, butthisobservationdoesnotexcludethepotentialinvolvementofotherMMPs,suchascollagenase.Aspostulatedforanimalgrowthplates,stromelysin may modulate proteoglycan degradation prior to min-eralization.SL-1appearstoplaythatroleintherabbitgrowthplate,
8
butitsapparentabsence,andthepresenceofSL-2inthehumanrib,may represent a species difference. The presence of differentialstainingpatternsinthechondro-osseousjunctionintheribindicatesthat SL-1 may be required for soft tissue degradation, allowing cellmigration and making space for the expanding bone, whereas SL-2may have a more specific role in resorption at precise cellularlocations.
This study demonstrates differential expression and possibly
distinct functional roles for SL-1 and SL-2 in human bonedevelopment. Further work is now required to design specificsubstrates for other MMPs and thus provide information on theirpotential functional roles and interactions.
Acknowledgments: J.E.C.issupportedbytheWellcomeTrust.R.M.H.
is funded by the Medical Research Council. The authors are indebted toChris Constant, Dr. Nick Coleman, and Dr. Wilf Kelsall for theirinvaluable supply of human bone.
References
1. Allan,J.A.,Hembry,R.M.,Angal,S.,Reynolds,J.J.,andMurphy,G.Binding
oflatentandhighMractiveformsofstromelysintocollagenismediatedbytheC-terminal domain. J Cell Sci 99:789–795; 1991.
2. Birkedal-Hansen, H., Moore, W. G. I., Bodden, M. K., Windsor, L. J.,
Birkedal-Hansen, B., Decarlo, A., and Engler, J. A. Matrix metalloproteinases:A review. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 4:197–220; (1993).
3. Blavier,L.andDelaisse ´,J.-M.Matrixmetalloproteinasesareobligatoryforthe
migration of preosteoclasts to the developing marrow cavity of primitive longbones. J Cell Sci 108:364–365; 1995.
4. Bord, S., Horner, A., Hembry, R. M., Reynolds, J. J., and Compston, J. E.
Production of collagenase by human osteoblasts and osteoclasts in vivo. Bone19:35–40; 1996.
5. Bord, S., Horner, A., Hembry, R. M., Reynolds, J. J., and Compston, J. E.
Distribution of matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitor, TIMP-1, indeveloping human osteophytic bone. J Anat 191:39–48; 1997.
6. Bradbeer, J., Lindsay, P. C., and Reeve, J. Fluctuation of mineral apposition
rate at individual bone remodelling sites in human iliac cancellous bone:Independent correlations with osteoid width and osteoblastic alkaline phospha-tase activity. J Bone Miner Res 9:1679–1686; 1994.
7. Breckon, J. J. W., Hembry, R. M., Reynolds, J. J., and Meikle, M. C. Matrix
metalloproteinases and TIMP-1 localization at sites of osteogenesis in thecraniofacial region of the rabbit embryo. Anat Rec 242:177–187; 1995.
8. Brown, C. C., Hembry, R. M., and Reynolds, J. J. Immunolocalization ofmetalloproteinases and their inhibitor in the rabbit growth plate. J Bone J Surg
71-A:580–593; 1989.
9. Chin, J. R., Murphy, G., and Werb, Z. Stromelysin, a connective tissue-
degrading metalloendopeptidase secreted by stimulated rabbit synovial fibro-blasts in parallel with collagenase. J Biol Chem 260:12367–12376; 1985.
10. Dodds, R. A. and Gowen, M. The growing osteophyte: A model system for the
study of human bone development and remodelling in situ. J Histotechnol17:37–45; 1994.
11. Edwards, J. C. W., Wilkinson, L. S., Soothill, P., Hembry, R. M., Murphy, G.,
and Reynolds, J. J. Matrix metalloproteinases in the formation of humansynovial joint cavities. J Anat 188:355–360; 1996.
12. Galis, Z. S., Sukhova, G. K., and Libby, P. Microscopic localization of active
proteasesbyinsituzymography:Detectionofmatrixmetalloproteinaseactivityin vascular tissue. FASEB J 9:974–980; 1995.
13. Hembry, R. M., Bagga, M. R., Reynolds, J. J., and Hamblen, D. L. Immuno-
localisation studies of six matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors,TIMP-1 and TIMP-2, in synovia from patients with osteo- and rheumatoidarthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 54:25–32; 1995.
14. Hill, P. A., Murphy, G. M., Docherty, A. J. P., Hembry, R. M., Millican, T. A.,
and Reynolds, J. J. The effects of selective inhibitors of matrix metalloprotein-ases (MMPs) on bone resorption and the identification of MMPs and TIMP-1in isolated osteoclasts. J Cell Sci 107:3055–3064; 1994.
15. Loveridge, N., Dean, V., Goltzman, D., and Hendy, G. N. Bioactivity of
parathyroid hormone and parathroid hormone-like peptide: Agonist and antag-onist activities of amino-terminal fragments as assessed by the cytochemicalbioassay and in situ biochemistry. Endocrinology 128:1938–1946; 1991.
16. Meikle, M. C., Bord, S., Hembry, R. M., Compston, J. E., Croucher, P. I., and
Reynolds, J. J. Human osteoblasts in culture synthesise collagenase and othermatrix metalloproteinases in response to osteotrophic hormones and cytokines.J Cell Sci 103:1093–1099; 1992.
17. Muller, D., Quantin, B., Gesnel, M. C., Millon-Collard, R., Abecassis, J., and
Breathnach, R. The collagenase gene family in humans consists of at least fourmembers. Biochem J 253:187–192; 1988.
18. Murphy, G. and Reynolds, J. J. Extracellular matrix degradation. In: Royce, P.
and Steinmann, B., Eds. Connective Tissue and Its Heritable Disorders. NewYork: Wiley-Liss; 1993; 287–316.
19. Murphy, G., Cockett, M. I., Ward, R. V., and Docherty, A. J. P. Matrix
metalloproteinase degradation of elastin, type IV collagen and proteoglycan.Biochem J 277:277–279; 1991.
20. Resnick, D. and Niwayama, G. Degenerative disease of extraspinal locations.
In: Resnick, D., Ed. Diagnosis of Bone and Joint Disorders (3rd ed.). Vol. 3.Philadelphia: Saunders; 1995; 1263–1372.
21. Rifas, L., Fausto, A., Scott, M. J., Avioli, L. V., and Welgus, H. G. Expression
of metalloproteinases and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase in humanosteoblast-like cells: Differentiation is associated with repression of metallo-proteinase biosynthesis. Endocrinology 134:213–221; 1994.
22. Saarialho-Kere, U. K., Pentland, A. P., Birkedal-Hansen, H., Parks, W. C., and
Welgus, H. G. Distinct populations of basal keratinocytes express stromely-sin-1 and stromelysin-2 in chronic wounds. J Clin Invest 94:79–88; 1994.
23. Sirum, K. L. and Brinckerhoff, C. E. Cloning of the genes for human
stromelysin and stromelysin-2: Differential expression in rheumatoid synovialfibroblasts. Biochemistry 28:8691–8698; 1989.
24. Thomson, B. M., Atkinson, S. J., McGarrity, A. M., Hembry, R. M., Reynolds,
J. J., and Meikle, M. C. Type I collagen degradation by mouse calvarialosteoblasts stimulated with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D
3: Evidence for a plas-
minogen-plasmin-metalloproteinase activation cascade. Biochim Biophys Acta1014:125–132; 1989.
25. Witty, J. P., Foster, S. A., Stricklin, G. P., Matisian, L. M., and Stern, P. A.
Parathyroid hormone-induced resorption in fetal rat limb bones is associatedwithproductionofthemetalloproteinasescollagenaseandgelatinase-B.JBoneMiner Res 11:72–78; 1996.
26. Wucherpfennig, A. L., Li, Y.-P., Stetler-Stevenson, W. G., Rosenburg, A. E.,
and Stashenko, P. Expression of 92 kD type IV collagenase/gelatinase B inhuman osteoclasts. J Bone Miner Res 9:549–556; 1994.
27. Zeng, G., McCue, H. M., Mastrangelo, L., and Millis, A. J. T. Endogenous
TGFbis modified during cellular aging: Effects on metalloproteinase and
TIMP-1 expression. Exp Cell Res 228:271–276; 1996.
Date Received: November 13, 1997
Date Revised: February 25, 1998
Date Accepted: February 25, 199812 S. Bord et al. Bone Vol. 23, No. 1
Stromelysin in bone development July 1998:7–12
