Osteoconduction in Large Macroporous Hydroxyapatite
Ceramic Implants: Evidence for a ComplementaryIntegration and Disintegration Mechanism
A. BOYDE,1A. CORSI,2R. QUARTO,3R. CANCEDDA,3,4and P. BIANCO2
1Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London, London, UK
2Dip Medicina Sperimentale, Universita ` dell’ Aquila, l’Aquila, Italy
3Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Centro di Biotecnologie Avanzate, Genova, Genova, Italy
4Dipartimento di Oncologia, Biologia e Genetica, Universita’ di Genova, Genova, Italy
Large, cylindrical implants of a porous calcium phosphate
ceramic (“hydroxyapatite” starting material, HAC) wereused to replace far greater than critical-sized sections of themidshaft of sheep tibiae and retrieved at 2 and 9 months;external fixation was used in the first 5 months. Excellentclinical function of these implants was reported in a previousstudy. The material retrieved was embedded in PMMA, andblocksweresectionedandsurfaceswerepolishedandcarboncoated prior to study using digital backscattered electron(BSE) imaging. Detailed scanning electron microscopy studyof the pattern of osseointegration of the implanted materialat early (2 months) and late (9 months) timepoints revealed apreviouslyunrecognizedpatternofintegration/disintegrationof this implant material in tandem with bone growth. Weconclude that bone adaptation to the HAC leads to its frac-ture and that the newly generated surfaces are equally os-teoconductive. This leads to a self-propagating, self-anneal-ing system in which defects in the HAC are mended byintercalation of bone. (Bone 24:579–589; 1999) © 1999 byElsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
Key Words: Hydroxyapatite ceramic implant; Orthopedics; Re-
pair mechanisms; Bone; Scanning Electron microscopy (SEM);Critical-sized segmental defect.
Introduction
Hydroxyapatite ceramic (HAC) is used in orthopedics and dental
implant surgery, either alone or in combination with other sub-stances or materials, and either in particulate form to fill bonydefects
2,14,33,36,37or as a coating on a metal implant.10,11,28,36
Although HA is supposedly osteoconductive, it has been reportedthat it is necessary to add other factors; for example, bioglass,
11,37
growth factors,30,40,41or osteogenic cells,1,12,26,34,35in order to
optimize bone formation following implantation of particulate HAmaterial. The overgrowth of bone on HA plasma-sprayed metal isgenerally excellent,
10,36but the union of HA to metal is often
doomedtolong-termfailureduetodebondingofHAfromthemetalstem. Large devices of an apatitic nature are in widespread use,having been derived from natural carbonate-containing coralline
materials.
8,15–18,29,38,39,42Surface layers of the coral are converted
into phosphate form, typically to a depth of a few microns. Devicesderivedfromhydrothermalconversionofcoralconserveitsoriginalmacroporosity. This is regarded as an important morphologicalcharacteristic of an implantable material in that it allows for in-growthofbloodvesselsandosteogeniccells,andresultsintheearlyformation of pseudohaversian systems within the framework pro-vided by the implant.
15,16
A difficulty or disadvantage frequently dwelt upon in the
clinical literature describing the use of (porous) HAC granules isthe difficulty of holding them in place during and immediatelyafter surgery. To overcome such problems, other materials havebeen added to cement them together during an initial healingstage, before and while bone growth is induced to form ashell-like framework of “trabecular” bone holding the piecestogether. Calcium sulfate (plaster of Paris
9), bioglass particles,
and calcium phosphate bone cements, alone or in combina-tion,
32,37have all been used for this purpose.
In the material used in the present study, HAC was fabricated
as a continuous structure prior to implantation. Large, cylindri-cal, anatomically shaped implants made entirely of a porouscalcium phosphate ceramic (“hydroxyapatite” starting material,HAC) were used effectively to reconstruct far greater thancritical-sizedgapdefectscreatedinthesheeptibia,thusrequiringexternal fixation during the initial healing phases, as previouslydescribed.
31Here,wedescribetheresultsofanSEMstudyofthe
pattern of osteointegration of the implanted HAC. This investi-gation revealed a previously unrecognized pattern of integrationand disintegration of the implant material concurrent with bonegrowth, whereby smaller fragments and bioactive surface en-hancement were generated in vivo as a direct consequence offunction and bone growth.
Materials and Methods
SurgeryDetails of the surgical procedure have been described previous-
ly.
31Briefly, 2-year-old ewes were operated upon to remove the
central 35 mm of the left tibial diaphysis, which was replacedwith a thick-walled, porous HAC tube. The implants werecylinders (20 mm diameter, 35 mm long, with a central channelof 10 mm maximum diameter) of a flattened-cylindrical cross-
Address for correspondence and reprints: Dr. Alan Boyde, Department
of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. E-mail: a.boyde@ucl.ac.uk
Bone Vol. 24, No. 6
June 1999:579–589
579 © 1999 by Elsevier Science Inc. 8756-3282/99/$20.00
All rights reserved. PII S8756-3282(99)00083-6
sectional shape designed to match that of the tibial segment. The
present study reports scanning electron microscopy (SEM) find-ings on unused HAC material, and on biological changes foundin material retrieved from two sheep, one killed at 2 monthswhen the external fixation was still in place, and another at 9months, 4 months after removing the external fixation.
Sample Preparation
At time of killing, the tibial diaphyses, including HAC cylinders,
were fixed in 4% formaldehyde (freshly made from paraformal-dehyde) in 0.1 mol/L (pH 7.2) phosphate buffer, dehydrated, andembedded in polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA). Sixteen PMMAblocks were prepared. The blocks included transverse sectionsfromthecenteroftheHAC-implanteddefectsegment,transversesections from the tibial shaft proximal and distal to the defectregion, and longitudinal sections of the proximal and distal endsof the HAC-implanted region and corresponding control con-tralateral sites.
Scanning Electron Microscopy
For SEM study, the PMMA blocks were polished and carbon
coated. Backscattered electron imaging (BSE) imaging was con-ducted in a digital SEM (Zeiss DSM 962, with a Kontron IBASexternal control computer) at an accelerating voltage of 10, 15,20, or 30 kV using an annular solid-state BSE detector (KEElectronics, Toft, Cambs, UK).
Toobtainlimitedpseudo-three-dimensional(3D)viewsofthe
HAC structure before and after the ingrowth of, and its incorpo-ration into, bone, some blocks were cut and polished to producesurfaces, which met at right angles. These were viewed in theSEM with the line joining the mutual faces perpendicular to thebeam, with the faces each at 45°. By using 45° tilt anglecorrection, images were made such that the adjacent faces ap-peared in the correct scale and 3D context when a photographicprint was folded at 90° along the intersect.
To obtain further information about the penetration of MMA
monomer into macro- (intergranular) and micro- (intragranular)pores, the HAC component of some PMMA-embedded sampleswas dissolved in 6N HCl. For retrieved implant material, thestrong acid treatment was alternated with (water washing and)treatment with a strong (10% available chlorine) sodium hypo-chlorite solution to dissolve the organic matrix components ofbone, before drying, carbon coating, and imaging, using second-ary electrons at a 1–2 kV accelerating voltage.
Unused HAC was cut into cubes that were carbon coated for
SEM examination.
Quantitative BSE Imaging
To document variations in the density of mineralization of bone
tissue, the SEM was operated under the strictly standardizedconditions previously described
3: namely a 20 kV, 0.5 nA
specimen current; a working distance of 17 mm from the pol-epiece of the final lens to give a sample-detector distance of 11mm; and nominal 33 3magnification, giving a 2.7 mm 32.7
mm square field size using 512 3512 pixels. Thermoset
dimethacrylate esters derived from the reaction of halogenatedphthalic acids and glycidylmethacrylate were used as standards.C
22H25O10Br (monobrom) has an electron backscattering coef-
ficient (0.1159) less than that of the least densely mineralizedbone. C
22H25O10I (monoiod) has an electron backscattering
coefficient (0.1519) higher than bone, and just higher thanpractically all calcified cartilage.
4,19,20Image gray-level histo-
grams were rescaled such that zero corresponded to the valuefrom the monobrom standard and 255 to the monoiod standard.
The bone volume fraction was calculated as the ratio of the areaoccupied by calcified tissue to the total field of view in whichbone could be measured. We calculated the mean corrected graylevels and the volume fractions of 16 equal-width density phasesas the ratio to the total amount of bone. To visualize areas withsimilar ranges of density it was necessary to use pseudo-colorcoding.
After the initial SEM study, some PMMA blocks were oxy-
gen plasma ashed at room temperature overnight to removesuperficial resin layers, before recoating with carbon.
Results
Structure of the HACThe HAC original contains continuous, more or less spherical
macropores (type I pores, Figure 1 a–c), the majority being
.100mm in radius, but extending in size upward to over 1 mm
radius. This pore system was continuous throughout the bulk ofthe HAC, as evidenced by the rarity of macropores that were notembedded with PMMA. Such blind cavities (Figure 1b) can bespotted easily in BSE-SEM images because the base of theresulting hemispherical concavity in the flat, polished HAC isbright, but less so than the surrounding polished solid, which iscloser to the BSE detector and thus gives a higher signal level inaccordancewiththeinversesquarelawforafinite-sizeddetector.
Within the HAC, a system of linear serpiginous discontinui-
ties (type II pores, Figure 1a,b) separated and defined large HACmacrodomainsorgrains.Eachsuchmacrodomainwascomposedof 2–5- mm-wide microdomains, resulting from the fusion of fine
crystals during sintering. Viewed alternatively, the fused mi-crodomains made a continuous phase of HA containing, to avariable extent, an entrapped, discontinuous phase of very smallpore spaces (Figure 1d). This latter, discontinuous pore spacejoined the macrodomain boundary planes. However, there wereplaces where adjacent macrodomains were joined—and throughwhich the entire structure was held together—and at these sitesthe microstructure probably resembled that in the bulk structure.
The amount of interstitial pore space separating individual
microdomains was found to vary significantly over distinctregions of the same pore surface. The macropore walls rangedfrom a smooth glaze, with rare pores penetrating between well-fusedmicrograins(typeAsurfaces,Figure1e)toareaswherethemicrograins were only partially fused and the fracture surfaceshowedextensive,partiallycontinuousintergranularmicroporos-ity (type B surfaces, Figure 1f).
Type I (round macropores) and type II (crevices separating
macrodomains) were easily penetrated by PMMA, and caststhereof were readily apparent in PMMA replicas of unimplantedHAC originals ( Figure 2a). In contrast, the microporosity within
the macroscopic grain domains was found not to have beenpenetratedbymethacrylatefurtherthanthemostsuperficiallocalsurface of the macropore space (Figure 2b).
Implants at placement contained no loose or fragmentary
superficial material. At 2 months, substantial regions of theconsolidated HAC body remained intact and complete and couldnot be distinguished in any important parameter from the unusedstarting material. The extent of intact HAC was substantiallyreduced at 9 months.
Integration of HAC
At both 2 and 9 months, the implanted ceramic cylinder and
newly formed bone together formed a physically highly inte-grated block. In the 2 month retrieval, much of the bone near the580 A. Boyde et al. Bone Vol. 24, No. 6
Osteoconduction in large macroporous HAC implants June 1999:579–589
HAC was highly cellular, woven bone that had commenced
formation near the HAC and grew toward it, but was not alwaysin the closest contact ( Figure 3a). In the 9 month retrieval, hosttissue had formed an extensive outer coat of newly formed bone
over the implant external surface. Host tissue had penetratedmost of the macropore space (Figure 3b), except for the rarely
Figure 1. (a) Low-power BSE image of an unused ceramic cube, demonstrating the system of spherical macropores (type I pores). Also apparent is
the system of linear “fissures” (type II pores) demarcating HA macrodomains within the specimen. (b) BSE image from HAC after embedding inPMMA, sectioning, and polishing, showing a blind pore cavity (arrow). (c)–(f) Twenty kilovolt BSE images of macropore wall in unused HA: one offourBSEdetectorsegmentswasswitchedtonegativetogenerateamoretopography-dependentcontrastintheseimages.Notethattwotypesofsurfacesare found in the same macropore wall: smooth, glazed surfaces, with only occasional poorly fused micrograins with intervening micropore space (de),and irregular surfaces characterized by extensive micropore-space-separating micrograins (f). (d) shows a section surface through HAC bulk at a si te
corresponding to a glazed surface. Note that internal micropore space is scanty and discontinuous. Bars 52 mm (a, b), 200 mm (c), 20 mm (d, f).581 Bone Vol. 24, No. 6 A. Boyde et al.
June 1999:579–589 Osteoconduction in large macroporous HAC implants
seenblindcavities,whichwerealsonotaccessibletothePMMA.
Thisindicatesthatthepassagewaysconnectingthelargercavernsexceeded the critical access limit of about 100 mm described by
Holmes.
16Bone tissue was adherent to and inextricably inter-
mingled with and integrated into the majority of the free HACsurfaces, whether external or internal (Figure 3a–c). At 9months, in most cases in which it was possible to analyze thedirection of the progress of bone formation with respect to HACand at least in the last local remodeling cycle, bone had formedon the HAC and grew away from it. However, innumerableinstances were also encountered of bone growth directed towardthe HAC, with arrest at a stage that left substantial soft tissuespace, presumably always including a small blood vessel, incontact with the ceramic (Figure 3d). Such resting surfaces canfrequently be seen as one side of a haversian canal in bone, witha less regular side made of HAC.
Bonehadalsoformedwithinfissure-like(typeIIpore)spaces
separating HAC macrodomains (Figure 3e). Furthermore, re-gions of HAC, characterized by significant microporosity (crosssections of type B surfaces), were recognized by a characteristiclace-like pattern produced by the irregular arrays of HAC mi-crodomains, which intercepted a maze of micropore space thatwas completely filled with bone (Figure 3f).Disintegration and Bony Repair of HAC
The HAC was partly fragmented in all of the material retrieved, but
muchmoresoat9monthsthanat2months.Inthe9monthsections,HACfragmentswereoutsidetherangeoftheoriginaldimensionsofthecylinder.Extensiveareasofnewlyformedboneappearedwithinthe territory of what had previously been the continuous HACcylinder. Different microscopic fields demonstrated either thegrowth of bone into pores of extensive and still continuous HACdomains (Figure 3c), or the scattering of apparently disconnectedfragments of HAC within a more or less continuous bony phase(Figure3d).ManyoftheoriginalfissuresoftheHAChadexpanded,and these enlarged cracks were filled with a bony phase (Figure 3eandFigure4a).Thefrequencyofsuchboneseamswasveryhighin
the 9 month retrieval, and far higher than the incidence of any suchcleft-like open space in the original product. Such space can there-fore be derived by faulting during function in vivo. Growth of bonewithin fissures may also be one of the factors associated with thegeneration of the HAC “fragments” scattered within, and separatedby,thebonephase.AswithmuchlargerHACdomains,thesmallerfragments themselves became highly integrated with the bonyphase, even providing portions of the walls of mature osteocytelacunae.Thehighestlevelsofbone/HACintegrationwereobservedover the surfaces of these scattered HAC fragments. Images ob-tained at low accelerating voltages to minimize penetration depthandimage“thickness”revealedabony-phasefilledHACporespaceof 1 mm or less in width. Furthermore, the dispersion of finely
subdivided,releasedindividualmicrodomainswithinasurrounding,continuous bony phase was also apparent in these images.
The features of the starting material just described indicate
that the entire HAC body is most likely to fail by exploiting thepre-existing, built-in crack planes of the macrodomain bound-aries.Nevertheless,somecrackswereseentopassthroughentiremacrodomain grains. Postmortem (artifactual) cracks induced inthe brittle ceramic phase by handling of the retrieved specimenswere readily distinguishable from those formed in vivo based ontheir characteristics. Brittle HAC fragments impacted in the softtissues during cutting and polishing of the sample were readilyrecognizable as such and discounted as artifactual in origin.Cracks resulting from the shrinkage of “bone” relative to HACduringsampledehydrationandPMMApolymerizationoccasion-ally passed across previously intact HAC macrodomains. Some-times, a surface layer of ceramic was seen to have been cleavedoff the bulk to remain adherent to bone, indicating an extraordi-narily high degree of interlocking of the bone formed at and inthe HAC surfaces.
Resorption of HAC
Clear instances of solubilization of HAC surfaces by osteoclastic
resorption were rare. We encountered numerous instances in the9monthretrievedmaterialinwhichalocalmodelingepisodehadremoved bone to leave the neighboring HAC seemingly un-scathed (Figure 4b and Figure 5 a). Examination of the same
PMMA blocks after plasma ashing to remove some superficialPMMA permitted more detailed examination of such areas (Fig-ure 5b) from which we concluded that osteoclastic acid produc-tion does affect substantially microporous HAC regions. Glazedregions(i.e.,thoseconsolidatedduringsinteringtotheextentthatno internal microporosity existed) were apparently exempt fromdetectable signs of osteoclastic resorption.
Types of Mineralized Tissue Formed in Relation to the Implant
A range of different skeletal tissues was identified in the new
shaftgeneratedbybonerepairuponandwithintheHACimplant.
Figure 2. (a) PMMA cast of macropores and inter(macro)granular clefts
prepared by strong acid dissolution of HAC in 9 month retrieval. (b)PMMA cast of macropore wall prepared by strong acid dissolution ofHAC in 9 month retrieval. The few projections on this surface representthe depth of penetration of methacrylate monomer into superficial mi-croporosity of the HAC. Bars 5200mm (a), 50 mm (b).582 A. Boyde et al. Bone Vol. 24, No. 6
Osteoconduction in large macroporous HAC implants June 1999:579–589
The dominant tissue in the external portions of the shaft, outside
the HAC cylinder, was fibrolamellar (plexiform) bone (i.e., thedominant structural type of bone normally found in sheep longbone shafts; Figure 3b). The higher proportion of woven boneand cartilage callus was found at 2 months.Compared with the structure of the contralateral unoperated
tibiae,themoreperipheralregionsofthenewlyconstitutedshafthadan overall lower degree of maturity, as indicated by large primaryosteonal systems and a lower degree of bone mineralization. Thiswas readily demonstrated by quantitated backscattered electron
Figure 3. (a) Two month retrieval. Evidence of bone growth within the macropores. (b) Nine month retrieval. Very-wide-field 30 kV image showing
extensive collar of bone at periphery of HAC cylinder in lateral side (tension cortex). The bone had formed as primary osteons—the plexiform naturecan be recognized along the periosteal edge at left—and many new large canals have formed by modeling within a band roughly 1–3 mm deep intothe periosteal surface. Note several separated fragments of HAC incorporated into bone: those apparently lying free in PMMA marrow and canal spaceare likely to have been impacted there during postmortem cutting of this slice. (c) Wide-field 15 kV image showing an extensive region in which theoriginal interconnecting macropore system has been retained. The many cracks in the HAC continuum here were generated postmortem, as can be seenby tracing the principal crack (to left of center) which skirts the bone implant interface within the HAC: growth of bone from an original spherical por e
wall can be seen immediately above this. Note the formation of new osteonal systems on the template provided by macropores. (d) Range of sizes ofHAC fragments, well incorporated into bone. Spherical pore at bottom center shows a bone surface that grew toward the empty half of this space. (e)Growth of bone into fissure-like (type II pore) space. (f) Growth of bone into micropore space (type B surfaces, see Figure 1f). Bars 51 mm (a), 2
mm (b–d), 200 mm (e), 50 mm (f).583 Bone Vol. 24, No. 6 A. Boyde et al.
June 1999:579–589 Osteoconduction in large macroporous HAC implants
imaging(QBSE)analysis( Figure6).Occasionally,primaryosteons
growing in a regular centripetal fashion from the wall of ceramicpores could be identified.
Larger spaces characterized the bone immediately adjacent to
or within the external portion of the ceramic cylinder as com-pared with the outer portions of the new shaft. In the inner canalof the ceramic cylinder, marrow and vascular space was soextensive as to render the bone structure essentially cancellous(Figure 7a). Most frequently, osteons growing within the pores
were irregular and incomplete.
Calcified cartilage remnants were found occasionally in the 9
month retrieval (Figure 7b) and more frequently in the 2 monthsections,indicatingthatcartilaginouscallushadbeeninvolvedatone stage in the repair process. Woven bone, as identified bylarge osteocyte lacunae, high cellularity, and the incidence ofconjoined osteocyte lacunae, was also found, but the sporadic
incidence indicates that, although it must have been present atearly healing stages, it had been largely replaced in subsequentremodeling events. Sharpey fiber bone was not uncommon, ashasbeenfrequentlyreportedinpriorstudiesofperi-implantbonein several mammalian species, including human retrieval mate-rial (Figure 7c,d).
Discussion
The value of HAC materials in orthopedic applications rests
upon osteoconductive properties coupled with an ability to “in-tegrate” effectively with bone tissue. Prior studies aiming atdefiningthepattern,morphology,andmechanismsofintegrationof HAC materials have focused mainly on the surface character-
Figure 4. (a) Heavily cracked region
from 9 month retrieval showing exten-sive growth of bone to fill and repaircracks in HAC. Note how the superfi-cial layer of HAC has cracked awayfrom the bulk to remain attached tobone (arrow). (b) A portion of an os-teocyte lacuna wall is provided byHAC. Also note microcracks followingmicroporosityparallelingtheHACsur-face at the interface. Reversal cementline pattern in bone shows that HACabove the level of juxtaposed osteocytelacuna experienced at least one oste-oclastic resorption cycle, but it cannotbe distinguished on grounds or mor-phology or density from any otherHAC surfaces. The indentations in theinterface in the lower part of the fieldare well below the dimensions of oste-oclastic resorption bays. (c, d) Thesame field imaged at 30 kV (c) and 10kV (d), showing an unusual, exten-sivelyfragmentingportionofHACthathas separated from the bulk HAC im-plant.Thispairofimagesillustratesthehighest degree of interlocking of HAand bone, and documents the relation-ship between information depth andbeam energy in BSE SEM. Note thattheosteocytelacunaseenattoprightofcenter at 30 kV cannot be found at 10kV. Small HA grains appear to liewithin the osteocyte lacunar domain at30 kV, but the 10 kV image clearlyshows them lying in the surroundingbone matrix. HAC spaces that appeartobefilledwithbonein(d)are1 mmor
less in width. Bars 5200mm (a), 20
mm (b–d).584 A. Boyde et al. Bone Vol. 24, No. 6
Osteoconduction in large macroporous HAC implants June 1999:579–589
istics of the implanted material and subsequent changes as bone
becomes deposited thereupon. Dominant concepts underlyingand supporting the use and design of HA “ceramic”-based boneimplants, including the use of devitalized, nonallergenic cancel-lous bone (e.g., defatted, superficially deproteinized [peroxide-treated] bovine cancellous [“Kiel”] bone, and calcined humantrabecular bone), emphasize that porous HAC provides a tem-plate for accretion of bone following the ingrowth of vascular-ized osteogenic tissue from the surrounding areas, implying thatthe material is eventually resorbable.
Inthisstudywehavecharacterizedthepatternofboneandan
HAC association using a sheep model. We provided evidencethat structural integration of HAC and bone goes far beyond themere use of HA as a structural template for proper formation ofnew osteonal systems.
16The smallest units in the material usedin this study were 2–5- mm-wide apatite particles, separated by
micropore space systems of variable width. The smallest detect-able spaces found in the HAC material, of the order of 1–2 mm,
can indeed be filled with newly formed bone, which indeedbehaves, with respect to the hard, inorganic HAC phase, as atruly fluid phase. The extraordinarily high degree of interlockingof the bone formed at and in the HAC surfaces was furtherdocumented by the pattern of postmortem cracking induced bydrying observed within the ceramic phase. For example, a sur-face layer was often found to have been cleaved off the bulkHAC to remain adherent to bone. This phenomenon closelymatches the cleavage behavior seen in PMMA-embedded teeth,where the more brittle enamel cracks within itself close to theenamel-dentine junction. This activity, however, may be anindicatorofsubsurfacemodificationwithintheHACduetoionic
Figure 5. (a) Resorption bays in bone
adjacenttounresorbedHAC.(b)Clear-est evidence of osteoclastic resorptionofHACisrevealedbyplasmaashingata region where osteoclastic resorptionbays have passed through bone and onto the adjacent HAC. Bars 550mm
(a), 100 mm (b).585 Bone Vol. 24, No. 6 A. Boyde et al.
June 1999:579–589 Osteoconduction in large macroporous HAC implants
mobility, akin to both the subsurface demineralization phenom-
enaofdentalenamelcariesandthesolubilizationassociatedwiththe formation of external calcium phosphate layers on Hench-type bioglasses.
6The range of BSE imaging possibilities depends on the input
beam energy and the spectral analysis of escaping electronsignals. Contradictory impressions of the interface of bone toimplant may be obtained at contrasting primary beam voltages
Figure 6. Quantitative backscattered electron imaging showing 2.7-mm-wide fields with signal range adjusted to that found between the monobromo (set to
0)andmonoiodo(settogreyvalue255)standards;lookuptableatcentershowspseudocolourassignedtoeachof16successivebandsofbonemineraliza tion
density.Topleft:partofcranialcortexofunoperatedtibia,showingplexiformprimarybonewithafewsparselyscatteredsecondaryosteonsthatap pearpurple.
Themostrecentlyformedoftheseinthetoprightcornerappearsred(bin16,greyrange161–176).BlacklinesarecracksinducedduringPMMAembedding .
Mean grey level 5203, maximum in bin 14 535.6% of all bone in field. Bone volume fraction 593%. Top right: part of cranial cortex of operated tibia
from 9 month tibia proximal to the resected segment, showing more substantially remodeled plexiform bone. Mean grey level 5188, maximum in bin 13 5
27.4%. Bone volume fraction 596%. Bottom left: another part of the cortex of the same operated tibia from 9 month tibia proximal to the resected segment,
showingawidestripofsubstantiallyremodeledplexiformbone.Meangreylevel 5185,maximuminbin13 523.9%.Bonevolumefraction 596%.Bottom
right: new bone apposed to HAC (part of large fragment shows in upper part of right side of field). HAC appears off scale as white, together with some part s
of the calcified cartilage remnants seen in the center of the field. All new bone formed in relation to the implant has a lower density than control unope rated
regions. Mean grey level 5161, maximum in bin 11 531.4%. Bone volume fraction 576%.586 A. Boyde et al. Bone Vol. 24, No. 6
Osteoconduction in large macroporous HAC implants June 1999:579–589
using an identical electron collection and detection system.5The
penetrationdepthoftheprimaryelectrons,andhencethevolumethatthe“average”backscatteredelectroninterrogatesandreturnsinformation relating to the composition of the surface layer,increasessharplywithbeamvoltage.Highervoltageimagesmaygive misleading information concerning the proximity of bonetissue and osteocytic lacunar spaces to the HAC. In the presentstudy, the use of lower accelerating voltages was instrumental inrevealing the actual degree of HAC-bone integration at thesmallest scale.
An important characteristic of the implant material used in the
present study was its fabrication as a solid, anatomically shapeddevice to eliminate problems arising from the use of particulateceramic. The ceramic was extensively integrated into bone, whichgrew over and outside the entire cylinders as well as into porespaces. An important finding of this study was the evidence that thehealing process involves, besides the “templating” effect of HACsurfaces, the growth of bone into fissures and the in vivo separationof pieces of HAC that are secondarily incorporated into bone.
Because there were no open cracks or loose fragments in theunimplanted material, and cracks were found to have been filledwith bone, it is obvious that HAC disintegration occurred in vivo.
Native fissures (type II pores separating macrodomains) in
the HAC used in this study were found to provide additionaltemplates for bone formation (besides the large, round type Imacropores), and also to provide potential sites for cleavage ofHAC fragments, due to the relatively poor degree of HACparticle fusion locally. In addition, cracks in the HAC weregenerated in vivo as fatigue fractures, via tensile and twistingstrains applied to the HAC through the newly formed bone,which makes such a close fit. The degree of mineralization ofbone obviously influences its stiffness. Because of the lowdegree of mineralization of bone formed within and around theimplant, as documented by our QBSE studies, the HAC implantwas in fact attached to, and integrated with, a bone material evenmore deformable than normal bone. Flexion and deformation in
Figure 7. (a) Very-wide-field 30 kV image
showing low-volume-density, new cancel-lousboneintheregionofthecentralcanalofthe HAC cylinder. The cylinder had brokeninto many large and small separated frag-ments. (b) Mineralized cartilage remnantsare recognized as the brighter regions inbone surrounding the HAC. (c, d) Patches ofSharpey fiber bone, recognized by the hy-pomineralized cores of the coarse fibers.Bars 52 mm (a), 200 mm (b), 50 mm (c),
200mm (d).587 Bone Vol. 24, No. 6 A. Boyde et al.
June 1999:579–589 Osteoconduction in large macroporous HAC implants
the interfacial region can thus be made more significant by the
mineralization characteristics of the newly formed bone, andmust inevitably lead to significant stress concentration and,eventually, to development of fatigue fractures within the HAC.In vitro studies have shown that osteogenic activity of bone cellsis enhanced selectively within grooves and cracks generated inmineralized tissue substrates.
23,24The observed “creeping”
growth of bone into HAC fissure-like spaces thus mirrors, invivo, a known behavior of bone cells in culture. Furthermore,however surprising, the ingress of a calcified tissue (which, fromits forming in thin layers in a bone domain, we have called“bone”) into very small cracks, much thinner than the expecteddimensions of osteoblasts, has been documented in previousstudies. Repeated separation of bone from smooth glass led to anincremental deposition of bone in the resulting crack-like spacein one experimental study using rabbits.
7
Resorbability is a desired characteristic for HAC materials used
in orthopedic surgery. The phenomena of cell-induced resorptiondifferinaccordancewiththequalityofwhatmustberesorbed.
5,21,27
In bone, acid produced by the osteoclast dissolves the extremelyfinely divided, much more easily soluble, carbonate-rich bone salt,leaving the organic matrix accessible to enzymatic degradation. InHAC, crystalline microdomains are interspersed by some micropo-rosity,butthecrystalsare,bycomparison,bothextremelylargeandvery dense; they also contain no carbonate. Furthermore, in bone,the osteoclast appears to stop any one resorptive cycle once a givenamount of calcium phosphate has been dissolved, and this endpointwillbereachedsoonerwithdenseHACthanwithbone.
21Thus,the
use of the term resorption in the context of mechanisms relating to
syntheticHAgraftsisvalidonlyinageneralsense.ThedensestHAceramic can probably not be significantly molested by osteoclasts.We speculate that an additional mechanism for the eventual disap-pearance of HAC may involve the generation of particles smallenough to be engulfed by macrophages and macrophage polykary-ons, in which the pH reduction within a totally sealed phagolyso-some may be sufficient to dissolve HAC. There may be a lessperfect seal of the osteoclast’s hemilysosome, given that it maynormally depend on sealing mechanisms of the cell to bone matrixmolecules, and these cells may work less efficiently in solubilizingHAC. Microporous, apatite ceramics have been shown to demon-strate subsurface solubility in the type of organic acid buffer systemusedtogenerateinvitrodentalenamelcaries.
13Etchingofthegrain
boundaries by partial dissolution of HA or other calcium phosphatespecies during months of immersion in body fluids may thus alsoaid in the slow HAC fragmentation. However, this may occur aswellinanyinstanceinwhichamicroporousdomainofHACwouldfallwithina(bone)resorptiveterritory.Indeed,thiswasfoundtobethe case in our material when plasma ashing techniques were usedprior to SEM examination.
Evidenceobtainedinthisstudyindicatesthatboneadaptation
to the HAC leads to HAC fracture, preferentially along pre-defined cleavage planes corresponding to boundaries betweenmacro- and microdomains of the HAC phase. This results in thegeneration of new osteoconductive surfaces, and a self-propagat-ing, self-annealing system in which HAC defects are continu-ouslygeneratedandmendedbyintercalationofbone.Theabilityof bone cells to deposit bone within spaces much smaller thantheir smallest dimensions, and to “mend” native or acquiredfaults within a solid HAC phase, leads us to revise the currentconcept of the pattern of osteoconduction as promoted by HACimplant devices. In addition, the continued search for an optimaldesign of ceramic implant devices, which must reconcile grossfeatures, stability at the implantation site, and permeability tocellsandtissues,maywellbereorientedtowardamaterialsuitedto generate particles in situ in the postimplantation period. Thisstudy has indeed shown that, far from being an undesired effect,in vivo microfractures result, due to the inherent ability of bone
cells to exploit them—a dual advantage as far as bone repair isconcerned.Inadditiontoprovidingastable,anatomicallyshapedimplant exempt from the drawback of particle mobilization at anearly time after surgery, the present HAC develops extensivesurfaces suited to, and used for, osteoconduction. This appearsespecially relevant in view of the rapid evolution of “bioengi-neered” implant materials used in conjunction with autologousosteogenic cells.
Acknowledgments: The authors thank M. Arora and R. Radcliffe (UCL)
for technical assistance. We thank E. Kon and M. Marcacci for perform-ing the surgery. The SEM facility for QBSE was established with MRCfunding. We also thank Sheila Jones for helpful discussion. This workwas supported in part by funds from the Istituto Superiore di Sanita ` and
MURST, Italy.
References
1. Begley, C. T., Doherty, M. J., Hankey, D. P., and Wilson, D. J. The culture of
human osteoblasts upon bone graft substitutes. Bone 14:661–666; 1993.
2. Bowen, J. A., Mellonig, J. T., Gray, J. L., and Towle, H. T. Comparison of
decalcifiedfreeze-driedboneallograftandporousparticulatehydroxyapatiteinhuman periodontal osseous defects. J Periodontol 60:647–654; 1989.
3. Boyde,A.,Compston,J.E.,Reeve,J.,Bell,K.L.,Noble,B.S.,Jones,S.J.,and
Loveridge, N. Effect of estrogen suppression on the mineralization density ofiliac crest biopsies in young women as assessed by backscattered electronimaging. Bone 22:241–250; 1998.
4. Boyde, A., Davy, K. W. M., and Jones, S. J. Standards for mineral quantitation
of human bone by analysis of backscattered electron images. Scanning17(Suppl V.):6–7; 1995.
5. Boyde, A. and Jones, S. J. Scanning electron microscopy of bone: Instrument,
specimen, and issues. Microsc Res Technol 33:92–120; 1996.
6. Boyde, A., Maconnachie, E., Muller-Mai, C., and Gross, U. SEM study of
surface alterations of bioactive glasses and glass-ceramics in a bony implan-tation bed. Clin Mater 5:73–88; 1990.
7. Boyde, A., Wolfe, L. A., Maly, M., and Jones, S. J. Vital confocal microscopy
in bone. Scanning 17:72–85; 1995.
8. Elsinger, E. C. and Leal, L. Coralline hydroxyapatite bone graft substitutes. J
Foot Ankle Surg 35:396–399; 1996.
9. Frame, J. W. Porous calcium sulphate dihydrate as a biodegradable implant in
bone. J Dent 3:177–187; 1975.
10. Friedman, R. J., Bauer, T. W., Garg, K., Jiang, M., An, Y. H., and Draughn, R.
A. Histological and mechanical comparison of hydroxyapatite-coated cobalt-chrome and titanium implants in the rabbit femur. J Appl Biomater 6:231–235;1995.
11. Giannini, S., Moroni, A., Pompili, M., Ceccarelli, F., Cantagalli, S., Pezzuto,
V., Trinchese, L., Zaffe, D., Venturini, A., and Pigato, M. Bioceramics inorthopaedic surgery: State of the art and preliminary results. Ital J OrthopTraumatol 18:431–441; 1992.
12. Goshima, J., Golberg, V. M., and Caplan, A. I. The osteogenic potential of
cultured-expanded rat marrow mesenchymal cells assayed in vivo in calciumphosphate ceramic blocks. Clin Orthop 262:298–311; 1991.
13. Gray, C., Boyde, A., and Jones, S. J. Topographically induced bone formation
in vitro: Implications for bone implants and bone grafts. Bone 18:115–123;
1996.
14. Heise, U., Osborn, J. F., and Duwe, F. Hydroxyapatite ceramic as a bone
substitute. Int Orthop 14:329–338; 1990.
15. Holmes, R. Bone regeneration within a coralline hydroxyapatite implant. Plast
Reconstr Surg 63:626–633; 1979.
16. Holmes, R. Osteoconduction in hydroxyapatite-based materials. In: Brighton,
F. G. and Lane, J. M., Eds. Bone Formation and Repair. Rosemont, IL:American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons; 1994.
17. Holmes, R. E., Bucholz, R. W., and Mooney, V. Porous hydroxyapatite as a
bone-graft substitute in metaphyseal defects. A histometric study. J Bone JtSurg [Am] 68:904–911; 1986.
18. Holmes, R. E., Bucholz, R. W., and Mooney, V. Porous hydroxyapatite as a
bone graft substitute in diaphyseal defects: A histometric study. J Orthop Res5:114–121; 1987.588 A. Boyde et al. Bone Vol. 24, No. 6
Osteoconduction in large macroporous HAC implants June 1999:579–589
19. Howell,P.G.andBoyde,A.MonteCarlosimulationofelectronbackscattering
from compounds with low mean atomic number. Scanning 20:45–49; 1998.
20. Howell, P. G. T., Davy, K. W. M., and B. A. Mean atomic number and
backscattered electron coefficient for some materials with low atomic meannumber. Scanning 20:35–40; 1998.
21. Jones, S. J., Arora, M., and Boyde, A. The rate of osteoclastic destruction of
calcified tissues is inversely proportional to mineral density. Calcif Tissue Int56:554–558; 1995.
22. Jones, S. J., Boyde, A., and Ali, N. N. The resorption of biological and
non-biological substrates by cultured avian and mammalian osteoclasts. AnatEmbryol 170:247–256; 1984.
23. Jones, S. J., Boyde, A., and Ali, N. N. The interface of cells and their matrices
in mineralized tissues: A review. Scann Electron Microsc 4:1555–1569; 1986.
24. Jones, S. J., Boyde, A., Ali, N. N., and Maconnachie, E. A review of bone cell
and substratum interactions. Scanning 7:5–24; 1985.
25. Jones, S. J., Gray, C., and Boyde, A. Simulation of bone resorption-repair
coupling in vitro. Anat Embryol (Berl) 190:339–349; 1994.
26. Lang, H., and Mertens, T. Porous hydroxyapatite ceramics with homologous
osteoblasts from cell cultures for bone replacement. Dtsch Z Mund KieferGesichtschir 15:64–68; 1991.
27. Langdon, D. J., Elliott, J. C., and Fearnhead, R. W. Microradiographic obser-
vation of acidic subsurface decalcification in synthetic apatite aggregates.Caries Res 14:359–366; 1980.
28. Lemons, J. E. Hydroxyapatite coatings. Clin Orthop 220–223; 1988.29. Light, M. and Kanat, I. O. The possible use of coralline hydroxyapatite as a
bone implant. J Foot Surg 30:472–476; 1991.
30. Louise, F. R. and Borghetti, A. F. New developments in synthetic bone
replacement materials. Curr Opin Dent 2:97–103; 1992.
31. Marcacci, M., Kon, E., Zaffagnini, S., Giardino, R., Rocca, M., Corsi, A.,
Benvenuti, A., Bianco, P., Quarto, R., Martin, I., and Cancedda, R. Recon-struction of extensive long bone defects in sheep using porous hydroxyapatitesponges. Calcif Tissue Int 64:83–90; 1999.
32. Mirtchi, A. A., Lemaitre, J., and Munting, E. Calcium phosphate cements:
Action of setting regulators on the properties of the beta-tricalcium phosphate-monocalcium phosphate cements. Biomaterials 10:634–638; 1989.33. Misch, C. E. and Dietsh, F. Bone-grafting materials in implant dentistry.
Implant Dent 2:158–167; 1993.
34. Nade, S., Armstrong, L., McCartney, E., and Baggalay, B. Osteogenesis after
bone and bone marrow transplantation. The ability of ceramic materials tosustain osteogenesis from transplanted bone marrow cells. Preliminary study.Clin Orthop 181:255–263; 1983.
35. Ohgushi, H., Goldberg, V. M., and Caplan, A. I. Repair of bone defects with
marrow cells and porous ceramic. Experiments in rat. Acta Orthop Scand60:334–339; 1989.
36. Oonishi, H. Orthopaedic applications of hydroxyapatite. Biomaterials 12:171–
178; 1991.
37. Oonishi, H., Kushitani, S., Yasukawa, E., Iwaki, H., Hench, L. L., Wilson, J.,
Tsuji, E., and Sugihara, T. Particulate bioglass compared with hydroxyapatiteas a bone graft substitute. Clin Orthop 334:316–325; 1997.
38. Ripamonti,U.Calvarialreconstructioninbaboonswithporoushydroxyapatite.
J Craniofac Surg 3:149–159; 1992.
39. Sartoris, D. J., Holmes, R. E., and Resnick, D. Coralline hydroxyapatite bone
graft substitutes: Radiographic evaluation. J Foot Surg 31:301–313; 1992.
40. Schliephake,H.,Neukam,F.W.,Lohr,A.,andHutmacher,D.Theuseofbasic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) for enhancement of bone ingrowth intopyrolized bovine bone. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 24:181–186; 1995.
41. Wang, J. S. Basic fibroblast growth factor for stimulation of bone formation in
osteoinductive or conductive implants. Acta Orthop Scand 269(Suppl.):1–33;1996.
42. Wolford, L. M., Wardrop, R. W., and Hartog, J. M. Coralline porous hydroxy-
lapatite as a bone graft substitute in orthognathic surgery. J Oral MaxillofacSurg 45:1034–1042; 1987.
Date Received: September 17, 1998
Date Revised: January 26, 1999
Date Accepted: January 26, 1999589 Bone Vol. 24, No. 6 A. Boyde et al.
June 1999:579–589 Osteoconduction in large macroporous HAC implants
