Original Full Length Article
Stress-whitening occurs in demineralized bone
M.R. Hardistya,b,T . C .G a r c i ac,S .C h o ya,J .D a h m u b e da, S.M. Stoverc, D.P. Fyhriea,b,⁎
aLawrence J Ellison Musculoskeletal Research Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, UC Davis School of Medicine, UC Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA
bBiomedical Engineering Graduate Group, UC Davis, Davis, CA, USA
cJD Wheat Veterinary Orthopedic Research Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, UC Davis, Davis, CA, USA
abstract article info
Article history:
Received 19 January 2013Revised 29 August 2013Accepted 31 August 2013
Available online 17 September 2013
Edited by: David Burr
Keywords:
BiomechanicsScattering
Cortical bone
Hansen's hydrogen bonding potentialOpticsStress-induced whiteningIntroduction: The incidence of age-related bone fracture is increasing with average population age. Bone scatters
more light (stress-whitens) during loading, immediately prior to failure, in a manner visually similar to polymer
crazing. We wish to understand the stress-whitening process because of its possible effect on bone toughness.
The goals of this investigation were a) to establish that stress-whitening is a property of the demineralized organ-ic matrix of bone rather than only a property of mineralized tissue and that stress whitening within thedemineralized bone is dependent upon both b) hydrogen bonding and, c) the orientation of loading.
Methods: Demineralized cortical bone specimens were loaded in tension to failure (0.08 strain/s). The effect of
hydrogen bonding on mechanical properties and the stress-whitening process was probed by altering the
Hansen's hydrogen bonding parameter ( δ
h) of the immersing solution.
Results: Stress-whitening occurred in the demineralized bone. Stress-whitening was negatively correlated with
δh(R2=0 . 8 1 , pb0.0001). Stress-whitening was signi ﬁcantly lower ( pb0.0001) in specimens loaded orthogo-
nally compared to those loaded parallel to the long (strong) axis.
Conclusion: The stress-whitening observed was consistent with increased Mie scattering. We suggest that the
change in Mie scattering was due to collagen ﬁbril dehydration driven by the externally applied stress. The pres-
ence of stress-whitening in demineralized bone suggests that this process may be a property of the collagenous
matrix and hence may be present in other collagenous tissues rather than an emergent property of the bone
composite.
© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Introduction
With increasing population age, the incidence of age-related bone
fracture has increased [1,2]. While some of the increase of fracture inci-
dence with age is related to bone mass loss, a signi ﬁcant part of the risk
is unexplained and may be caused by changes in intrinsic material prop-
erties of the hard tissue [3].
Bone is composed of a mineral phase, an organic phase, and extracel-
lularﬂuid[4]. The mineral phase is critical to bone stiffness and the or-
ganic phase is responsible for much of bone's strength and toughness[5]. Fracture risk in bone increases with age. There is little or no change
in mean mineralization with aging [6], but the tissue nevertheless be-
comes weaker/less tough [5]. The change in toughness due to age is like-
ly related to the organic phase (collagen). Therefore, this investigationwas focused on the organic phase of bone.
It is important to understand how bone toughness changes with
aging, disease, and drug treatments [7,8]. Damage (microcracks) within
bone is normal and may play an important regulatory role in bone re-
modeling [9]. The ubiquity of microcracks within bone and theiroccurrence with only atraumatic loading imply that crack growth is ofgreater concern than initiation [10]. Mineralized collagen ﬁbrils com-
bined with macromolecules that glue the ﬁbrils together with many
sacriﬁcial bonds within bone have been shown to de ﬂect and bridge
cracks [5]. Bone's organic phase plays a primary role in increasing bone's
toughness post-yield and during the accumulation of damage within
bone [11–14]. Cracks within bone have been shown to be more easily
nucleated and propagated in bones from older individuals [15].
Stress-whitening in bone
Immediately prior to failure due to loading, bone has been observed
to visually whiten (i.e. stress-whiten) in a manner visually similar to thecrazing of glassy polymers [16]. The interest in stress-whitening in bone
arises from its temporal proximity to crack nucleation, propagation, and
ultimate failure of bone. In polymer crazing, white bands ranging from
50 to 1000 μm in length form due to loading [17]. These white bands
consist of small polymer ﬁbrils and micro-voids that are of a size such
that light is scattered causing the characteristic change in color. Crazing
increases toughness of polymers by dissipating energy in two principal
ways, by disentanglement of polymer chains and by creation of new
surface area within pores [18]. Crazes differ from cracks in that crazesBone 57 (2013) 367 –374
⁎Corresponding author.
E-mail address: dpfyhrie@ucdavis.edu (D.P. Fyhrie).
8756-3282/$ –see front matter © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2013.08.029
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Bone
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/bone
continue to bear load through the polymer ﬁbrils, while unbridged
cracks do not [19].
Stress-whitening has not been extensively studied in bone; however,
previous reports have identi ﬁed it as a potential damage process that in-
creases toughness. Currey observed that bone became visually whiter
when mechanically loaded. The stress-whitening was particularly visible
around stress-concentrators when illuminated from the front [16].S t r e s s -
whitening in trabecular bone was studied by observing axial compressive
loading of bone cores using high speed photography [20].R e g i o n st h a t
stress-whitened were imaged with scanning electron microscopy and
cracks were found, suggesting that the stress-whitening was the result
of microcrack formation. Further, the cracks were shown to be bridged
by mineralized collagen ﬁbrillar structures. The authors concluded that
bridging ﬁbrils and the spaces between the ﬁbrils in a microcrack scatter
light and, therefore, caused the stress-whitening. The same process of
stress-whitening has also been observ ed in thin sections of cortical bone
as increased darkness in transmitted light images taken during tensile
loading [21]. Stress-whitening was attributed to nano-pores formed by
debonding of mineral crystals from collagen molecules. In contrast to
the work of Thurner, microcracks were not detected with atomic force
microscopy. Stress-whitening was observed as an increase in the back-
scattered spectra, 400 –900 nm within notched cortical bovine bone
specimens. Mechanical loading was shown to affect both the intensity
of back-scattered light and the spectral distribution [22].
Much remains to be learned about stress-whitening, its importance
in bone strength, the mechanisms that cause it, and how these process-
es may change with disease, age or drug treatment. As we will demon-
strate, bone tissue with the mineral removed also whitens under
loading demonstrating that microcracks and/or separation of mineral
platelets and the matrix cannot be the only mechanisms of stress-
whitening. This investigation seeks to further characterize the stress-
whitening toughening mechanism that we hypothesize arises from
bone's collagen ﬁbrils.
Hydrogen bonding in bone
The organic phase within bone interacts with the ﬂuid phase as well
as the mineral phase creating a stiff and strong construct. The material
properties of collagenous materials are profoundly affected by the hy-
dration of the collagen molecules. Collagen molecules are con ﬁned by
covalent crosslinking (pyridinoline, nonenzymatic glycation related
cross-links, etc.) and by mineralization [23].C o nﬁnement of the colla-
gen molecule provides a stabilizing effect on the molecular structure
(“collagen in a box ”[24]). However increased stability of the collagen
molecules does not necessarily lead to better apparent bone properties;
both covalent cross-linking and mineralization have been shown to
increase with age and to increase bone fragility [25–27]. Collagen mole-
cules also are stabilized by noncovalent interactions, including hydro-
phobic and polar interactions; introducing different solvents can alter
these interactions, effecting stability [28].
The extent of hydrogen bonding between collagen proteins can be
controlled by using solutions of different Hansen solubility parameters
(HSP), particularly δh, the hydrogen bonding parameter [29]. The hy-
drogen bonding parameter ( δh)q u a n t i ﬁes the energy from hydrogen
bonding between molecules of the solute and solvent [30]. Following
the principle of “like dissolves like ”solvents and solutes with suf ﬁcient-
ly similar δhinteract and the solute dissolves (i.e., the hydrogen bonds
are broken). For solvents with high values of δhthe collagen molecules
bind less to each other and more to the solvent causing the matrix to
soften. Many solvents have known HSP and by mixing two (or more)
miscible solvents, one can control the δhof the solvent by varying the
concentrations of each component.
The effect of solvent δhon dentin has previously been studied [29,31]
although the authors explicitly attributed the effects of different sol-
vents to dehydration rather than to different degrees of hydrogen
bond dissolution by the solvents. Decreasing δhhas been shown toincrease stiffness of dentin [32]. Similarly, drying bone has been
shown to increase stiffness and decrease strength [14].
The goal of this investigation was to establish that stress-whitening
is a property of the demineralized organic matrix of bone. This will ex-
pand on previous investigations that have found this phenomenon in
fully mineralized bone [16,20 –22]. We hypothesize that stress whiten-
ing within the demineralized bone is dependent upon both a) hydrogenbonding and b) the orientation of loading relative to the primary direc-
tions of the collagen ﬁbers of the matrix.
Materials and methods
Twenty- ﬁve cortical bone specimens were cut from the medial-
distal quadrant of the diaphysis of the third metacarpal bone (MC3) of
necropsied thoroughbred racehorses ( Fig. 1 ). The beams were cut into
2 × 8 × 30 mm rectangular prisms using a diamond-coated band saw
(310, EXAKT, Oklahoma City, OK, USA) under constant irrigation with
deionized water. Beams were stored at −20 °C before use.
The central 10 mm of the beams were demineralized using a buff-
ered [sodium citrate (100 g/L)] formic acid (22.5%) solution known to
maintain the integrity of the collagen network [33]. The proximal and
distal 10 mm ends of the beams were protected from demineralizationby a nail varnish (Coty, New York, USA) coating [34]. Demineralization
was assessed by digital radiography (Eklin Mark III, Min X-Ray
HF100+, Northbrook, IL, USA). Demineralization media was changed
every other day for 5 days. The beams were made into dog-bone shaped
specimens ( Fig. 1 ) with a minimum cross-sectional area of 4 mm
2
(2 × 2 mm) using a custom designed jig to guide biopsy punches
(Acuderm, Ft. Lauderdale, FL, USA). Specimens were marked for the pur-
pose of assessing optical strain by digital image correlation as part of an-
other study (data not shown) [35].
Mechanical testing
Specimens were loaded in tension at a constant strain rate (0.08 ±
0.006) to failure using a servo-hydraulic system (Load Unit 319.25A/T,
MTS Systems Corp., Eden Prairie, MN, USA) ﬁtted with a load cell with
a 2000 N range (model no. 662.20C-01 MTS Systems Corp., Eden Prairie,
MN, USA). Specimens were mounted such that the mineralized portions
of the beams were clamped creating a gauge length of 10 mm using an
MTS interface previously described [36]. All mechanical testing was
conducted at 37 °C, held constant by immersion in a temperature con-
trolled ﬂuid bath. The ﬂuid bath was constructed from acrylic with visu-
alization of the specimen through clear polycarbonate ( Fig. 1 ).
Axial apparent stress was calculated as the force measured by the
load cell divided by the initial minimum cross-sectional area. Apparent
strain was estimated as the change in length of the entire specimen di-
vided by the original length. Elastic modulus was calculated using the
linear portion (linear Regression, Excel, Microsoft, Redmond, WA) of
the force displacement curve and a linear-elastic ﬁnite element model
of the ideal initial sample geometry. Ultimate strain and stress were
also calculated.
The effect of hydrogen bonding on the mechanical properties and
stress-whitening process was probed by immersing the specimens
in 1 of 4 solutions with a different Hansen's hydrogen bonding parame-
ter (δh) during mechanical testing: 100% ethanol ( δh=1 9 . 4M P a½),
saline (9g NaCl/LH2O,δh=4 2 . 3M P a½), 40% ethanol –60% saline ( δh=
33.14 MPa½), or 70% ethanol –30% saline ( δh=2 6 . 2 7M P a½). Prior to
mechanical testing, specimens were immersed in the solution that
they were tested in for 1 h to allow the specimens to equilibrate with
the solution.
The effect of the orientation of the bone structure was probed by cut-
ting beams that were parallel to and orthogonal to the long axis of the
bone.
Damage, cracking and stress-whitening during mechanical testing
(Fig. 1 ) were monitored with high speed (1000 fps) high resolution368 M.R. Hardisty et al. / Bone 57 (2013) 367 –374
(1280 × 1024 pixels) stereo cameras (Phototron Fastcam PCI, San Diego,
CA), illuminated by 2 white light tungsten halogen lamps (DVY 650 W,
3400 K, Model 700 SG Smith-Victor Corp., Bartlett, Illinois, USA)
mounted on tripods placed 1.5 m away, ~45° at the height of the sample,
directed toward the sample, subsequently adjusted for any shadowing.
Stress-whitening of the specimens was quanti ﬁed by manual segmenta-
tion (ImageJ, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA) of the ﬁrst frame ( Fig. 2 )a n dt h e n
an automated level set segmentation method, relying on edge detec-
tion [37] was used to track the specimen in subsequent frames. Stress-
whitening was quanti ﬁed within each frame as a fractional increase in
brightness relative to the initial unloaded frame (MATLAB, MathWorks,
Natick, MA, USA). The intensity of pixels within the images was
corrected for differences in illumination by correction to a referenceslide of white and black regions that was included within the visual
ﬁeld in all videos. The extent of stress-whitening was calculated as the
average pixel intensity over the whole visible front of the specimen
(Fig. 2 ) relative to the initial average specimen intensity, as follows:
W¼X
xX
yImaxx;yðÞ
npixel−X
xX
yIinitx;yðÞ
npixelX
xX
yIinitx;yðÞ
npixel−Icorrectionð1Þ
where Imaxrepresents the intensity of the image on which the maxi-
mum increase in intensity was observed. Iinitwas the intensity of the
image prior to loading. Icorrection was the average intensity of the refer-
ence slide. The image intensities were averaged within the region of in-
terest for each frame from the high speed video.
To investigate the possibility of stress-whitening being permanent,
the stress-whitening was quanti ﬁed (Eq. (1)) in a circular subregion
within the specimens that did not visibly crack. Stress-whitening within
the circular region was quanti ﬁed prior to loading, during loading and
after load had been removed by failure of the specimen.
Statistical analysis
Least squares regression (JMP, SAS institute, Cary, NC, USA) was used
to identify correlations between the mechanical properties of thespecimens, stress-whitening, and δh.L a c ko f ﬁt tests were run to inves-
tigate the possibility of an inappropriate statistical model. Multivariable
linear regression was used to look for a relationship combining the
mechanical properties with δhto predict stress-whitening (R, The R
foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). Partial R2was
used to quantify the relative contribution of each parameter in any mul-
tivariable regressions. A previous investigation within our laboratory
showed a sudden transition in elastic modulus at δh=2 9M P a½[38].
Based on this sudden transition, a sigmoid was ﬁt to stress-whitening
−δhrelationship as:
W¼wmax−wmin
e−δh−β
α/C0/C1
þ1þwmin ð2Þ
The effect that the orientation of the specimens had on the mechanical
properties and the stress-whitening was quanti ﬁed by analysis of vari-
ance (ANOVA).
Results
Stress-whitening was observed in bone's organic matrix without the
presence of mineral ( Fig. 2 ). Stress-whitening was observed in all speci-
mens tested, with the greatest stress-whitening occurring in the saline
immersed parallel aligned specimens ( Fig. 3 ,Table 1 ). Stress-whitened
regions were more apparent both in terms of intensity and area for spec-
imens immersed in higher δhsolutions. Maximum stress-whitening
was correlated with δh(R2= 0.81, pb0.0001). A sigmoid model
(Eq. (2),Fig. 4 ) explained the same amount of variation in whitening
(R2=0 . 8 1 , pb0.0001, Wmin=0 . 1 2 7 , Wmin=0 . 9 0 8 , β= 30.6, α=
3.50) as the linear model. All lack of ﬁt tests performed were not signif-
icant. The linear correlation model was modestly improved by including
ultimate strain in a multivariable model ( Radj2=0 . 8 6 , pb0.0001; partial
R2:Rδh|εu2=0 . 8 9 , p= 0.0003; Rεu|δh2= 0.54, pb0.0001). No other me-
chanical properties of the specimens added statistically signi ﬁcant con-
tributions to the multivariable model.
The specimens in the different solvent groups showed very different
mechanical properties. The lowest δhsigniﬁcantly increased the elastic
modulus compared to the largest [260 MPa ( δh=1 9 . 4M P a½)v s .
170 MPa ( δh=4 2 . 3M P a½);δhexplained 35% of the change in modulus
Fig. 1. Mechanical testing setup: Specimens were loaded in tension (0.08/s) while immersed in solutions of ethanol and saline within a transparent temperat ure (37 °C) controlled bath.
The specimens were imaged with high-speed stereo cameras. Bone specimens were taken from the medial-distal quadrant of the mid-diaphysis of equine t hird metacarpus. Bone was
demineralized to have an effective 10 mm gauge length.369 M.R. Hardisty et al. / Bone 57 (2013) 367 –374
(p= 0.006)]. Similarly ultimate strength was also signi ﬁcantly corre-
lated to δhwith a negative slope ( R2=0 . 3 3 , p=0 . 0 0 8 , Fig. 3 ). Ultimate
strain did not signi ﬁcantly vary with δh. Elastic modulus was correlated
with strength ( R2=0 . 7 0 , pb0.0001, Fig. 5 ).
The stress –strain curves of the demineralized bone specimens were
typical of soft biological tissues [39]. The specimens showed a nonlinear
relationship between stress and strain, with an initial toe region with a
low tangent modulus followed by increasing modulus with strain, and
then a nearly linear region until failure. Specimens failed suddenly with-
out strain softening prior to obvious crack nucleation and propagation.
A1) A2) 
B1) B2) A3) 
B3) 
C3) C2) C1) C4) B4) A4) 
Fig. 2. Stress-whitening of specimens in different solutions: Specimens were immersed in saline, δh=4 2 . 3M P a½(A&C) or ethanol, δh=1 9 . 4M P a½(B). The tensile loading direction was
parellel to (A&B) and orthogonal (C) to the long axis of the bone. Specimens are depicted immidiately prior to loading (1), immediatly before cracking began (2) and immediately after
failure (3). Whitening was observed in all cases; however greater whitening was observed in the parellel-aligned saline immersed (A) than either, th e parellel-aligned ethanol immersed
(B) or, the orthogonal-aligned saline immersed (C) specimens ( Table 1 ). Red contour line shows the region used to quantify whitening. 4: Whitening and stress plotted against strain:
Stress-whitening increased till rupture then was greatly reduced, showing that whitening of the matrix was reversible. Specimens immersed in salin e showed an s-shaped relationship
between whitening and strain, suggesting that whitening may be independent of damage. Mechanical behavior was consistent with previous ﬁndings; specimens had an increasing elastic
modulus with increasing strain [34]. Specimens were marked with a black marker, giving them a speckled appearance for the purpose of tracking optical strain (not reported). Specimen
illumination and camera position were held constant during mechanical testing. Changes in illumination and the unloaded whiteness of the specimens were controlled for by normalizing
the stress-whitening values to a reference slide and the initial, unloaded whiteness of each specimen.
Fig. 3. Mechanical property variation with δh: Ultimate Stress was correlated with δh
(R2=0 . 3 3 , p= 0.008) and elastic modulus was correlated with δh(R2=0 . 3 5 , p=
0.006). “a”and “b”denote signi ﬁcantly different groups (Tukey's HSD, pb0.05). Similar
to a previous study conducted within this laboratory, mechanical properties of the speci-mens did not vary with δ
hat high values ( δhN30)[38].Table 1
Mechanical properties and stress-whitening o f demineralized bone parallel to and orthogo-
nal to the long axis of the bone from which they were cut. Specimens were fully hydratedduring testing by immersion in normal saline. All mechanical properties and stress-whitening were found to be statistically different between the groups (ANOVA, pb0.0001).
Alignment Stress-
whiteningE(MPa) Ultimate
strength (MPa)Ultimate
strain (%)
Parallel to bone's long axis 0.88 ± 0.24 167 ± 50 32 ± 4.8 14.1 ± 4
Orthogonal to bone's long axis 0.28 ± 0.07 11.9 ± 2.0 5.1 ± 0.8 30 ± 1370 M.R. Hardisty et al. / Bone 57 (2013) 367 –374
The shape of the fracture surfaces differed between the groups; parallel
aligned specimens immersed in solutions of high δhhad cracks that
turned along the long axis of the specimen ( Figs. 2 and 6 ), whereas or-
thogonally aligned specimens had cracks grow straight across the thin-
nest part of the specimen, consistent with the region with the highest
stress. Similar to the orthogonal specimens, parallel aligned specimens
immersed in low δhsolutions had cracks that grew straight across the
thinnest part of the specimen, consistent with the region with the
highest stress.
The relationship between stress-whitening and strain differed be-
tween the groups ( δhand direction). In the saline immersed specimens,
the stress-whitening had an s-shaped behavior ( Fig. 2 , A4) with applied
strain. The rate of stress-whitening with strain increased at low strain
values. The relationship between stress-whitening and strain was
linear at mid-range values of strain. At higher values of strain, stress-
whitening reached a plateau with increasing strain. This s-shaped
curve was not present in solutions of lower δhor in the orthogonally
aligned specimens.
Stress whitening in the saline-immersed parallel aligned specimens
was evident almost immediately upon stretching, occurring prior to the
end of the toe region of the stress –strain curve ( Fig. 2 ,A 4 ) .I nc o n t r a s t ,
ethanol immersed specimens did not demonstrate signi ﬁcant stress-whitening until the toe region in the stress –strain relationship had
ended and stress was increasing nearly linearly with strain ( Fig. 2 , B4).
Permanent stress-whitening after removal of mechanical loading
was not present ( w=−0.02 ± 0.06). Post hoc power analysis showed
that any permanent stress-whitening after failure could have been de-
tected for a value of 0.03( α= 0.05, power = 0.8) given the number
of samples suggesting that there is very little or no permanent stress-
whitening present after unloading.
Discussion
Stress-whitening was observed in the organic matrix of bone with-
out the presence of the mineralized phase. We further demonstrated
that stress-whitening of demineralized bone was decreased when the
matrix is solvated using ﬂuids of lower Hansen's solubility than normal
saline and when the material was loaded in a different direction.
The change in stress-whitening between the parallel and orthogonal
aligned demineralized specimens was consistent with changes in
stress-whitening observed in mineralized bone specimens that showed
minimal stress-whitening when loaded in the radial direction [40].T h e
changes in modulus and strength of the demineralized bone specimens
were consistent with previous studies demonstrating that the elastic
modulus and strength of demineralized tooth dentin vary with δh,t h e
Hansen hydrogen bonding parameter [32].
Stress-whitening in demineralized bone matrix was inconsistent
with the crazing as seen in homogenous polymers which consists of
voids opening. Crazes in polymers are a localized phenomenon occur-
ring in regions where the crazing stress is exceeded. Crazes form as
bands of stretched polymer ﬁbrils that are disentangled by the loading
from the solid mass of polymer chains in the bulk matrix of the material.
Once a craze is formed, it is completely irreversible [41]. The stress-
whitening in our matrix specimens was not localized to the region of
maximum stress and also appeared to be reversible. There was no de-
tectable permanent stress-whitening in the unloaded material as
would be expected from a crazed region. An additional observation is
Fig. 4. Stress-whitening vs. δh: A sigmoid relationship (shown in black) ﬁts the data
(R2=0 . 8 2 , pb0.0001). The transition within the sigmoid occurred between δh=
26.27 and 33.14 MPa½similar to the value of δhthat caused swelling of matrix in separate
experiments [38].
Fig. 5. Elastic modulus vs. ultimate stress in parallel aligned specimens: Ultimate stress
was correlated with the elastic modulus ( R2=0 . 7 , pb0.0001). This was in line with
theﬁnding that ultimate strain was not signi ﬁcantly correlated with δh,w h i l e δhdid
have a signi ﬁcant effect on the elastic modulus and ultimate stress.
Fig. 6. Post-failure images of in specimens from different solutions showing crack direc-
tion: Parallel-aligned specimens: 1) tested in saline, δh=4 2 . 3M P a½; 2) tested in ethanol,
δh=1 9 . 4M P a½. Specimens (4 of 5) immersed in solutions of high, δh=4 2 . 3M P a½had
cracks that turned in the direction of the long axis of the specimen. Specimens (5 of 5) im-mersed in low δ
hsolutions had cracks that grew straight across the thinnest part of the
specimen without turning.371 M.R. Hardisty et al. / Bone 57 (2013) 367 –374
that during the growth of a polymer craze, the damaged material
expands primarily at the boundary between the craze and the bulk
polymer —the site of disentanglement of the polymer chains. The disen-
tanglement process becomes less energetically favorable as the height
of the craze grows ultimately leading to failure of the polymer backbone
at the edge of the craze growth region [18]. In the bone matrix speci-
mens studied within our investigation, the location of failure wasalways at the geometric stress concentration, not at the periphery of
the whitened region as would have been expected for a crazing-like
process.
Previous investigators have ascribed the phenomenon of stress-
whitening in mineralized bone tissue to the formation of nano-pores
between mineral crystals and collagen ﬁbrils [21], or microcracks
with collagen ﬁbril bridging [42]. Analogous nano-pore formation or
microcracks within demineralized tissue could occur and cause similar
changes in scattering. Both of these explanations imply that the process
would not be reversible as observed in this investigation and previous
work in our laboratory [38]. Neither of these explanations for the occur-
rence of stress-whitening in bone tissue was consistent with all the data
found within this investigation for demineralized bone.
We will focus below on an optical theory of whitening within the or-
ganic phase that can be applied to both mineralized and demineralized
bone. Other mechanisms that contribute to stress-whitening may di-
rectly involve the mineral phase; however they will not be addressed
here, as the focus of this investigation was the organic phase within
bone. The validity of a theory that explains stress-whitening within
mineralized bone by focusing solely on the organic component will re-
quire further experimental validation and will be the subject of future
experiments.
Optical theory of bone's organic matrix
Light scattering for collagenous tissues is mathematically modeled
as a collection of scattering particles (representing the collagen ﬁbrils)
within a ﬂuid phase [43]. Materials that scatter small amounts of light
appear transparent, while materials that scatter large amounts of light
appear opaque.
We will focus our attention in this investigation on the Mie theory
used to describe light scattering from particles that are on the order of
the wavelength of light (200 nm –5μm). We will not discuss Rayleigh
scattering which describes scattering by particles that are much smaller
than the wavelength of light [44]. We have chosen to focus on Mie scat-
tering because the magnitude of Rayleigh scattering caused by collage-
nous materials is predicted to be smaller than Mie scattering within the
visual spectrum and the scattering within skin has been primarily at-
tributed to Mie scattering [45].
Mie scattering theory predicts that the reduced scattering coef ﬁ-
cient, μ′
s, quantifying the magnitude of scattering by a material, is de-
pendent upon the volume fraction of the collagen ﬁbrils ( ϕﬁbril)a n d
the ratio of the refractive index of the collagen ﬁbrils to that of the sol-
ventnfibril
nsol/C16/C17
.[43,45,46] :
μ′s¼ϕfibril1−ϕfibril ðÞ ðÞnfibril
nsol−1/C18/C192:09/C18/C193:28πa22πansol
λ/C16/C170:37
Vfibril0
B@1
CAð3Þ
Vﬁbrilis the volume of a scattering particle, “a”is the radius of a scatter-
ing particle and λis the wavelength of incident light. The reduced
scattering coef ﬁcient ( μ′s) is the ratio of incident photon ﬂux to the
scattered ﬂux divided (normalized) by the thickness of the scattering
medium [43,46] . A clear material will have a low scattering coef ﬁcient
and low scattering ﬂux; most of the photons will be transmitted. An
opaque material will have a higher scattering coef ﬁcient and most of
the photons will be scattered.
Note that the ﬁrst bracketed expression of Eq. (3)shows the depen-
dence with ﬁbril volume fraction and that this expression is maximizedwhen ϕﬁbril= 0.5. The second bracketed expression shows the depen-
dence on the refractive index ratio. Scattering increases as nﬁbrilin-
creases. The third expression shows the dependence of scattering on
the geometry of the scattering particle.
The question is which of the parameters from Eq. (3)may be affected
by mechanical stress such that scattering is increased due to tensile
loading. Load induced changes to the volume fraction of collagen ﬁbrils
(ϕﬁbril) and of the refractive index of collagen ﬁbrils ( nﬁbril)b o t hm a y
explain stress-whitening in bone matrix (we assume that the refractive
index of the solvent is not changed by the loading).
The refractive index of a medium made up of isotropically distributed
molecules is directly related to numerical molecular density (#/volume)
(c), and polarizability ( α) through the Lorentz –Lorenz (LL) equation [47]:
n2¼1þ8
3παc
1−4
3παcð4Þ
Polarizability measures how strongly a static electric ﬁeld induces elec-
tric dipoles in the material [48]. (Note that this relationship will be
only roughly accurate for the orthotropic microstructure of bone; how-
ever it will allow a useful discussion of the effect of loading on refractive
index.)
Mechanism of stress-whitening in bone
The stress-whitening phenomenon is consistent with a densi ﬁcation
of the ﬁbrils due to applied load ( Fig. 7 ). More speci ﬁcally, the mechan-
ical loading overcomes the osmotic pressure holding solvent within
the collagen ﬁbril causing the solvent molecules to move into the
interﬁbrillar space. Moving solvent out of the ﬁbrils and into the
interﬁbrillar space has a dual effect on scattering by 1) increasing the re-
fractive index of the ﬁbrils ( nﬁbril). Through increasing the numerical
density (c) of molecules within the ﬁbrils and 2) decreasing the volume
fraction of the collagen ﬁbrils (such that ϕﬁbril→0.5) and increasing the
volume fraction of the inter ﬁbrillar ﬂuid. Both of these effects would
cause increased scattering.
The thinning of collagen ﬁbrils causing stress-whitening was also
identi ﬁed by Xu et al. as a possible explanation for the previously ob-
served changes in back-scattered white light spectra in mineralized
bone specimens [22]. This idea that load causes ejection of the ﬂuid
from the ﬁbril is reasonable, given the sensitivity of collagen ﬁbril hy-
dration to other environmental factors (mineralization and crosslinking
[23]). However, we do not yet have a mechanistic explanation for such
an effect. A possible explanation is lateral contacts between entangled
loops of the ﬁbrils; another is a possible “wringing out ”of twisted ﬁ-
brils. Consistent with the idea of water's interaction with collagenous
tissue changing due to loading, mechanistic (atomic level) modeling
of individual tropocollagen molecules demonstrates that axial me-
chanical loading changes the con ﬁguration of the triple helix in a
manner that certainly changes the water content of the molecule
[49,50] . In particular, tension on the molecule reduces the tendency
of the molecule to “open, ”reducing water between the strands of
the triple helix [50]. However the atomic level modeling does not in-
corporate ﬁbrils. Intra ﬁbrillar –intermolecular water is likely more im-
portant to the stress-whitening process given more water is present
intramolecularly and it is not nearly as strongly bound. Regardless of
the exact mechanism, however, movement of ﬂuid from within to
outside of the ﬁbrils as a function of load can explain the observed
change in whiteness.
The model of water mobility also explains the reduced whitening for
lowδhsolutions and for loading orthogonal to the long axis. In the case
of low δhsolvents the collagen matrix will not interact as strongly with
the solvent. Instead of interacting with the solvent (i.e., instead of im-
bibing the ﬂuid to interact with collagen) the molecules will bind to372 M.R. Hardisty et al. / Bone 57 (2013) 367 –374
each other, rejecting the solvent. Fewer solvent –collagen interactions
will lead to less solvent within the collagen ﬁbrils in the unloaded
state and consequently fewer molecules to be driven out during loading.
The reduced stress-whitening for the orthogonal specimens is
explained by their much lower rupture load (5 vs. 32 MPa, Fig. 3 ). The re-
duced stress within the ﬁb r i l sr e d u c e st h ep r e s s u r ed r i v i n gt h ew a t e r
molecules out of the ﬁbrils and thereby reduces the stress-whitening.
It is interesting to speculate whether ejection of the ﬂuid from the ﬁ-
bril causes increased intermolecular hydrogen bonding between colla-
gen molecules, increasing the failure load compared to the hydrated
state. Such a mechanism would be consistent with observations that
show dehydration increases strength of ﬁbrils [51]and increases colla-
gen stability at the molecular level [23]. It is possible that stress-
whitening is an adaptation of the collagen matrix that increases ﬁbrillar
strength by ejecting internal water at the extremes of loading just prior
to rupture.
When the demineralized matrix does not show a strong relative
stress-whitening effect (e.g., when it is in a low δhsolvent or when load-
ed perpendicular to the primary direction of collagenous matrix) the
matrix is weak and not tough. It is reasonable to conjecture that the col-
lagenous matrix expresses the property of toughness (and increased
strength) when it is in a condition (or loaded in a direction) that permits
stress whitening.
It is important to note that the data presented here were on
demineralized samples; therefore generalization to mineralized bone
may not be straightforward. The focus on demineralized bone within
this investigation was both a limitation and an advantage. The advan-
tage of using demineralized specimens was the increased simplicity of
the system and the ability to attribute our observations strictly to the or-
ganic phase. Demineralized bone is much less stiff ( Emin=1 7G P a [7],
Edemin = 170 MPa) and has a higher failure strain than mineralized
bone ( εf_min =0 . 0 1 5 –0.08 [52,53] ,εf_demin = 0.17). Additionally, con-
trary to the ﬁndings in this investigation in demineralized bone,
stress-whitening has always been observed to be at least partially irre-
versible in mineralized bone; this may be because of irreversible defor-
mation of the mineral phase [20,22] . Damage mechanisms (such as
dilatational band formation [54], breaking of mineral –collagen bonds
[21]) in mineralized bone that occur coincident (possibly in a causal
manner) with stress-whitening may not occur in demineralized bone
or may occur in a different order in demineralized bone. An important
point here is the size of structures (200 nm –5μm) likely to affect Mie
scattering. Collagen ﬁbrils, nano-voids [21], microcracks [42]and dilata-
tional bands [54]are all structures that likely cause Mie scattering and
hence could cause stress-whitening in mineralized tissue.The ability of bone matrix to stress-whiten may indicate healthy
matrix. Future studies speci ﬁcally investigating changes in stress-
whitening with disease could be undertaken to investigate this possibil-
ity. Other investigators [16] are of the opinion formed from anecdotal
observation that stress whitening is less apparent in old bone, dry
bone, more mineralized bone and in bone that has damaged collage-
nous matrix —all conditions associated with weak and/or brittle tissue.
Changes in collagen ﬁbrils that affect the ability to whiten can be
expected to change, presumably to reduce, bone toughness.
Conclusion
Stress-whitening occurred within demineralized bone, showing that
the organic phase was associated with stress whitening without any
mineral contribution. The stress-whitening observed may be explained
by a stress related increase in Mie scattering from the collagen ﬁbrils.
This study has established a connection between hydrogen bonding
and stress-whitening. The intensity of stress-whitening was signi ﬁcant-
ly lower in demineralized specimens tested in a solvent of lower δh,i m -
plicating hydrogen bonding in the process. Stress-whitening was
greatest when the demineralized matrix was loaded along the stiffer
and stronger axis.
The stress-whitening process observed was inconsistent with poly-
mer crazing. The stress-whitening phenomenon was consistent with
collagen ﬁbril dehydration driven by externally applied stress. However,
this mechanistic theory will require further experimentation to verify
its validity and completeness; however, it ﬁts with the experimental ob-
servations of stress-whitening in this investigation in demineralized
specimens and previous investigations in mineralized bone matrix.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by National Institutes of Health
(AR040776). We would like to thank Samuel Ravani for his assistance
in processing the videos acquired during this investigation.
References
[1]Lips P. Epidemiology and predictors of fractures associated with osteoporosis. Am J
Med 1997;103:3S –8S [discussion 8S –11S].
[2]Kannus P, Parkkari J, Sievänen H, Heinonen A, Vuori I, Järvinen M. Epidemiology of
hip fractures. Bone 1996;18:57S –63S.
[3]Burr DB, Forwood MR, Fyhrie DP, Martin RB, Schaf ﬂer MB, Turner CH. Bone
microdamage and skeletal fragility in osteoporotic and stress fractures. J Bone
Miner Res 1997;12:6 –15.
Fig. 7. Model of collagen ﬁbrils causing an increase in the scattering of light: A) Unloaded demineralized bone matrix is a more uniform phase of collagen ﬁbrils and consequently scatters
less light. B) Collagen ﬁbrils under load will be smaller volumetrically ( ↓ϕﬁbril) and denser ( ↑c) thereby leading a higher ﬁbrillar refractive index ( ↑nﬁbril) ultimately causing more scattering
(Eq.(3)). Light changes direction at the interface of regions with different refractive indices [e.g., between the collagen ﬁbril ( nﬁbril) and the solvent ( nsol) leading to scattering].373 M.R. Hardisty et al. / Bone 57 (2013) 367 –374
[4]Kruzic JJ, Ritchie RO. Fatigue of mineralized tissues: cortical bone and dentin. J Mech
Behav Biomed Mater 2008;1:3 –17.
[5]Ritchie R, Buehler M, Hansma P. Plasticity and toughness in bone. Phys Today
2009;62:41 –7.
[6]Boivin G, Meunier PJ. The degree of mineralization of bone tissue measured by com-
puterized quantitative contact microradiography. Calcif Tissue Int 2002;70:503 –11.
[7]Tjhia C, Odvina C, Rao D, Stover S. Mechanical property and tissue mineral density
differences among severely suppressed bone turnover (SSBT) patients, osteoporoticpatients, and normal subjects. Bone 2011;49:1279 –89.
[8]Tjhia C, Stover S, Rao D, Odvina C, Fyhrie D. Relating micromechanical properties and
mineral densities in severely suppressed bone turnover patients, osteoporotic pa-
tients, and normal subjects. Bone 2012;51:114 –22.
[9]Martin RB, Burr DB, Sharkey NA. Skeletal Tissue Mechanics. New York: Springer
Verlag; 1998.
[10] Gupta HS, Zioupos P. Fracture of bone tissue: the “hows ”and the “whys ”. Med Eng
Phys 2008;30:1209 –26.
[11] Wynnyckyj C, Willett T. Changes in bone fatigue resistance due to collagen degrada-
tion. J Orthop Res 2011;29:197 –203.
[12] Barth HD, Launey ME, Macdowell AA, Ager JW, Ritchie RO. On the effect of X-ray ir-
radiation on the deformation and fracture behavior of human cortical bone. Bone
2010;46:1475 –85.
[13] Wang X, Bank R a, TeKoppele JM, Agrawal CM. The role of collagen in determining
bone mechanical properties. J Orthop Res 2001;19:1021 –6.
[14] Yan J, Daga A, Kumar R, Mecholsky JJ. Fracture toughness and work of fracture of hy-
drated, dehydrated, and ashed bovine bone. J Biomech 2008;41:1929 –36.
[15] Nalla RK, Kruzic JJ, Kinney JH, Balooch M, Ager JW, Ritchie RO. Role of microstructure
in the aging-related deterioration of the toughness of human cortical bone. Mater Sci
Eng C 2006;26:1251 –60.
[16] Currey JD. Bone: Structure and Mechanics. Princeton: Princeton University Press;
2006 [456 pp.].
[17] Brown HR. Studies of orientation and structure of crazed matter in polystyrene. I.
Optical measurements. J Polym Sci Polym Phys Ed 1979;17:1417 –30.
[18] Lee J. Deformation and Failure Mechanism of Nanosctructured Polymer Thin Films.
Amherst: University of Massachusetts; 2007.
[19] Kramer E, Berger L. In: Kausch H, editor. Crazing in Polymers. Fundamental process-
es of craze growth and fracture. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer; 1990. p. 1 –68.
[20] Thurner PJ, Erickson B, Jungmann R, Schriock Z, Weaver JC, Fantner GE, et al. High-
speed photography of compressed human trabecular bone correlates whitening to
microscopic damage. Eng Fract Mech 2007;74:1928 –41.
[21] Sun X, Hoon Jeon J, Blendell J, Akkus O. Visualization of a phantom post-yield defor-
mation process in cortical bone. J Biomech 2010;43:1989 –96.
[22] Xu Z, Sun X, Liu J, Song Q, Muckley M, Akkus O, et al. Spectroscopic visualization of
nanoscale deformation in bone: interaction of light with partially disordered nano-
structure. J Biomed Opt 2010;15:060503.
[23]
Avery N, Bailey A. Restraining cross-links responsible for the mechanical properties
of collagen ﬁbers: natural and arti ﬁcial. Collagen. Springer; 2008 81 –110.
[24] Miles CA, Ghelashvili M. Polymer-in-a-box mechanism for the thermal stabilization
of collagen molecules in ﬁbers. Biophys J 1999;76:3243 –52.
[25] Zimmermann E a, Schaible E, Bale H, Barth HD, Tang SY, Reichert P, et al. Age-related
changes in the plasticity and toughness of human cortical bone at multiple length
scales. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;108:14416 –21.
[26] Currey JD. Role of collagen and other organics in the mechanical properties of bone.
Osteoporos Int 2003;14:29 –36.
[27] Parﬁtt A. Bone age, mineral density, and fatigue damage. Calcif Tissue Int 1993;53:82 –6.
[28] Bembey AK, Bushby AJ, Boyde A, Ferguson VL, Oyen ML. Hydration effects on the
micro-mechanical properties of bone. J Mater Res 2006;21:1962 –8.
[29] Nalla RK, Balooch M, Ager JW, Kruzic JJ, Kinney JH, Ritchie RO. Effects of polar sol-
vents on the fracture resistance of dentin: role of water hydration. Acta Biomater
2005;1:31 –43.[30] Hansen C. Hansen Solubility Parameters: A User's Handbook. CRC Press; 2007 [544 pp.].
[31] Maciel KT, Carvalho RM, Ringle RD, Preston CD, Russell CM, Pashley DH. The effects
of acetone, ethanol, hema, and air on the stiffness of human decalci ﬁed dentin ma-
trix. J Dent Res 1996;75:1851 –8.
[32] Pashley DH, Agee K a, Carvalho RM, Lee K-W, Tay FR, Callison TE. Effects of water and
water-free polar solvents on the tensile properties of demineralized dentin. Dent
Mater 2003;19:347 –52.
[33] Yeni YN, Schaf ﬂer MB, Gibson G, Fyhrie DP. Prestress due to dimensional changes
caused by demineralization: a potential mechanism for microcracking in bone.
Ann Biomed Eng 2002;30:217 –25.
[34] Bowman SM, Zeind J, Gibson LJ, Hayes WC, McMahon TA. The tensile behavior of
demineralized bovine cortical bone. J Biomech 1996;29:1497 –501.
[35] Jenks K, Hardisty MR, Garcia-Nolan T, Stover SM, Fyhrie DP. Stress induced whiten-
ing of bone matrix is strain dependent. Orthopaedic Research Society Meeting; 2013.
p. 0745.
[36] Bigley RF. Volume Effects on Strength and Fatigue Life of Equine Cortical Bone. Davis:
University of California; 2007.
[37] Li C, Xu C, Gui C, Fox MD. Distance regularized level set evolution and its application
to image segmentation. IEEE Trans Image Process 2010;19:3243 –54.
[38] Soicher MA, Hardisty MR, Garcia TC, Stover SM, Fyhrie DP. Hansen's hydrogen bond-
ing potential of bathing solution modi ﬁes elastic modulus (MPa) and whitening of
demineralized bone matrix. Orthopaedic Research Society Meeting; 2012. p. 1369
[San Francisco, CA].
[39] Tang H, Buehler MJ, Moran B. A constitutive model of soft tissue: from nanoscale col-
lagen to tissue continuum. Ann Biomed Eng 2009;37:1117 –30.
[40] Szabó ME, Thurner PJ. Anisotropy of bovine cortical bone tissue damage properties.
J Biomech 2013;46:2 –6.
[41] Sauer J, Hara M. Effect of molecular variables on crazing and fatigue of polymers.
Crazing in Polymers, vol. 2; 1990.
[42] Thurner PJ, Erickson B, Schriock Z, Langan J, Scott J, Zhao M, et al. High-speed pho-
tography of the development of microdamage in trabecular bone during compres-
sion. J Mater Res 2006;21:1093 –100.
[43] Rylander C, Stumpp O, Milner T. Dehydration mechanism of optical clearing in tis-
sue. J Biomed Opt 2006;11:041117-1-7.
[44] Bruno G. Classical theory of Rayleigh and Raman scattering. The Raman Effect: A
Uniﬁed Treatment of the Theory of Raman Scattering by Molecules; 2002 31 –48.
[45] Saidi IS, Jacques SL, Tittel FK. Mie and Rayleigh modeling of visible-light scattering in
neonatal skin. Appl Opt 1995;34:7410 –8.
[46] Liu H, Beauvoit B, Kimura M, Chance B. Dependence of tissue optical properties
on solute-induced changes in refractive index and osmolarity. J Biomed Opt
1996;1:200 –11.
[47] Fuller GG. Optical rheometry. Annu Rev Fluid Mech 1990;22:387 –417.
[48] Tuchin V. Glossary 1. Physics, Statistics, and Engineering. Tissue Optics: Light
Scattering Methods and Instruments for Medical Diagnosis; 2000 595 –661.
[49] Buehler MJ, Wong SY. Entropic elasticity controls nanomechanics of single tropocol-
lagen molecules. Biophys J 2007;93:37 –43.
[50] Chang S-W, Flynn BP, Ruberti JW, Buehler MJ. Molecular mechanism of force induced
stabilization of collagen against enzymatic breakdown. Biomaterials 2012;33:
3852 –9.
[51] Shen ZL, Dodge MR, Kahn H, Ballarini R, Eppell SJ. Stress –strain experiments on in-
dividual collagen ﬁbrils. Biophys J 2008;95:3956 –63.
[52] Hernandez CJ, Tang SY, Baumbach BM, Hwu PB, Sakkee a N, Van der Ham F, et al.
Trabecular microfracture and the in ﬂuence of pyridinium and non-enzymatic
glycation-mediated collagen cross-links. Bone 2005;37:825 –32.
[53] Fyhrie DP, Vashishth D. Bone stiffness predicts strength similarly for human verte-
bral cancellous bone in compression and for cortical bone in tension. Bone
2000;26:169 –73.
[54] Poundarik AA, Diab T, Sroga GE, Ural A, Boskey AL, Gundberg CM, et al. Dilatational
band formation in bone. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012;109:19178 –83.374 M.R. Hardisty et al. / Bone 57 (2013) 367 –374
