Bone Vol. 21, No. 3 
September 1997:281-287 
ELSEVIER 
Three-Dimensional Imaging of Trabecular Bone Using the 
Computer Numerically Controlled Milling Technique 
J. D. BECK, 1 B. L. CANFIELD, l S. M. HADDOCK, 1 T. J. H. CHEN, 1 M. KOTHARI, 2 
and T. M. KEAVENY 1'3 
i Orthopaedic Biomechanics Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA 
Departments of 2 Radiology and 3 Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Although various techniques exist for high-resolution, three- 
dimensional imaging of trabecular bone, a common limita- 
tion is that resolution depends on specimen size. Most tech- 
niques also have limited availability due to their expense and 
complexity. We therefore developed a simple, accurate tech- 
nique that has a resolution that is independent of specimen 
size. Thin layers are serially removed from an embedded 
bone specimen using a computer numerically controlled 
(CNC) milling machine, and each exposed cross section is 
imaged using a low-magnification digital camera. Precise 
positioning of the specimen under the camera is achieved 
using the programmable feature of the CNC milling machine. 
Large specimens are imaged without loss of resolution by 
moving the specimen under the camera such that an array of 
field-of-views spans the full cross section. The images from 
each field-of-view alre easily assembled and registered in the 
postprocessing. Higll-contrast sections are achieved by stain- 
ing the bone black with silver nitrate and embedding it in 
whitened methylmethacrylate. Due to the high contrast na- 
ture and high resolution of the images, thresholding at a 
single value yielded excellent predictions of morphological 
parameters such as bone volume fraction (mean - SD per- 
cent error = 0.70 +-. 4.28%). The main limitations of this fully 
automated "CNC milling technique" are that the specimen is 
destroyed and the ]process is relatively slow. However, be- 
cause of its accuracy, independence of image resolution from 
specimen size, and ease of implementation, this new tech- 
nique is an excellent method for ex situ imaging of trabecular 
architecture, particularly when high resolution is required. 
(Bone 21:281-287; 1997) © 1997 by Elsevier Science Inc. 
All rights reserved. 
Key Words: Bone architecture; Cancellous bone; Histomor- 
phometry; Imaging; Three dimensional; Trabecular bone. 
Introduction 
High-resolution, three-dimensional imaging techniques are cur- 
rently being used to investigate the effects of osteoporosis, aging, 
disease, drug treatment, and bone remodeling on trabecular 
architecture. 3,5,7,1°,11'16'17 These imaging techniques typically 
Address for correspondence and reprints: Tony M. Keaveny, Ph.D., 
6175 Etcheverry Hall, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720- 
1740. E-mail: tmk@euler.me.berkeley.edu have resolutions of 20-150 Ixm over a 1 cm 3 region and are 
generated by one of three methods: microcomputed tomography 
or "micro-CT"l'4'll; high-resolution magnetic resonance imag- 
ing or "micro-MRI"2'9A3; and serial sectioning with direct light 
imagingJ 4"15 Although each method has particular advantages, a 
common limitation is that maximum image resolution is always 
constrained by specimen size. Unless different regions of a 
specimen can be imaged in multiple sessions and later recom- 
bined, 8 the specimen size must be decreased if image resolution 
is to be increased. Conversely, resolution must be decreased 
when directly imaging larger specimens. In addition, both mi- 
cro-CT and micro-MRI require relatively expensive equipment 
and substantial postprocessing of raw data, factors that limit the 
availability of these techniques to the general research community. 
We describe a new technique, based on the serial-sectioning 
technique,14'15 for generating high-resolution, three-dimensional 
models of trabecular bone in which image resolution is indepen- 
dent of specimen size. The method produces accurate images, 
requires minimal postprocessing, is relatively simple and inex- 
pensive to implement, and is fully automated. As described in 
what follows, although this "CNC milling technique" destroys 
the specimen during imaging, its unique advantages justify its 
use in ex situ studies of trabecular architecture, particularly when 
high resolution is required. 
Materials and Methods 
The overall strategy is to serially remove thin layers of an 
embedded, high-contrast specimen using a computer numerically 
controlled (CNC) milling machine while capturing high-resolu- 
tion digital images of each layer using a low-magnification lens 
and digital camera (Figure la). The technique consists of three 
phases: specimen preparation; automated CNC milling with 
image capture; and image processing. 
Specimen preparation consists of cleaning the bone, staining 
it black, and embedding it into a white polymer matrix. This 
produces a high-contrast embedded specimen (black bone, white 
polymer) that eventually yields images which are simple to 
threshold for subsequent morphologic analysis and three-dimen- 
sional rendering. We describe the process as it was developed for 
8-mm-diameter, 10-ram-long cylindrical specimens of trabecular 
bone, although similar techniques can be used for any size 
specimens. Cleaning is achieved by gentle rinsing with a water 
jet followed by trichloroethylene soaking with ultrasound agita- 
tion (Bransonic, Branson Ultrasonics Corp., Danbury, CT), all 
repeated three times to ensure marrow removal without trabec- 
ular damage. Cleaning of larger specimens can also be done as 
© 1997 by Elsevier Science Inc. 281 8756-3282/97/$17.00 All rights reserved. PII $8756-3282(97)00122-1 

282 J.D. Beck et al. Bone Vol. 21, No. 3 
Imaging of trabecular bone September 1997:281-287 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 1. (a) Schematic of the CNC milling imaging process, and (b) 
detail of a specimen ready for processing. The specimen (bone black) is 
held in the pneumatic grips as shown. During the cutting process, the 
vacuum (A) is used to remove chips as they are produced. After cutting, 
the specimen is moved under the air jet (B), where compressed air cleans 
the surface of any residual chips, and then (optional) under the UV light 
(C), where residual silver is reacted to ensure complete staining of the 
bone. The specimen is finally moved under the CCD camera, lens (D), 
and ring illuminator (E) for image capture. Note that the camera, lens, 
and ring illuminator (and vacuum) are rigidly mounted to the vertical axis 
of the mill, such that the vertical distance from the milled surface of the 
specimen to the lens is constant. 
described in the literature. 15 After cleaning, the specimens are 
stained black at room temperature by immersion in a 10% (wt) 
silver nitrate (AgNO3) solution, first for 20 min in an ultrasound 
chamber, and then for 24 h; this process is repeated once with a 
fresh solution. The specimens are then rinsed in water, dried with 
an air jet, and placed into 100% ethanol where they are exposed 
to long-wave UV light (Gates UV light, George Gates and Co., 
Franklin Square, NY) for 40 rain. For optimal exposure, we used 
glass vials, placed the specimen on its side as close as possible to 
the UV light source, and rotated the specimen 180 ° about its long 
axis after 20 min. Staining occurs by diffusion of the silver 
nitrate into the bone and substitution of Ag for Ca ions. The Ag 
is reduced by the UV light, giving the bone a deep black matted 
(nonreflective) color. 
After staining, the specimens are prepared for embedding. 
First, they are dehydrated in fresh 100% ethanol for 24 h at room 
temperature (we have found that graded alcohol solutions are not 
necessary); this process is repeated once. Second, they are placed A 13 
Figure 2. Typical two-dimensional image of an exposed cross-section: 
(A) the raw image as obtained from the digital camera; and (B) the 
threshold image (bone black). Because of the high-contrast black/white 
coloring of the embedded specimen and the uniformity of lighting 
provided by the ring illuminator, the raw image is an excellent represen- 
tation of the real bone microstructure and a single threshold value can be 
used during postprocessing. 
into a methylmethacrylate solution that has a 15% mixture by 
volume of white pigments (Tap epoxy pigmentation, Tap Plastics 
Corp., E1 Cerrito, CA), and degassed in a vacuum chamber for 20 
min. This degassing process is repeated three times, each time 
replacing the old pigmented methylmethacrylate with fresh 
stock. On the last cycle, the vials are tightly capped, placed into 
a water bath, and cured in an oven at 35°C for 24 h. The result 
is a high-contrast black and white bone-polymer composite. 
After curing, the specimens are removed from their vials for 
automated CNC milling. Larger specimens can be prepared 
similarly or with other protocols. 15 We have found so far that the 
most critical step in the embedding process is avoiding air 
bubbles. Care must be taken to control the rate of the polymer- 
ization reaction, particularly with larger specimens. The reaction 
can be slowed by surrounding the curing specimen with a water 
bath and reducing the ambient temperature. 
The main hardware component is a standard table-top CNC 
milling machine (SpectraLite 0200, Light Machines Corp., 
Manchester, NH). Its vertical axis is mounted with a digital 
camera (CCD Model XC-75, Sony, Japan), low-magnification 
lens (Pan-Cinor 1:3,8 f = 17, Som-Berthoit, France), and ring 
illuminator (Lite Mite ring illuminator, Stocker & Yale, Beverly, 
MA) (Figure lb). The digital camera is connected to a personal 
computer (PC) via an image-grabber board (Pro256, Altech, 
Milpitas, CA) which produces 8 bit, 640 × 480 pixel gray-scale 
images. This PC is connected via a serial port to a second PC that 
controls operation of the CNC machine. By rigidly attaching the 
Figure 3. Schematic of the conversion of a series of two-dimensional 
images of each exposed section into a three-dimensional model of the 
specimen. The two-dimensional images are stacked into a three-dimen- 
sional data set (left), which is then rendered as a three-dimensional 
porous solid (right). Registration of images along the cutting axis is 
simple due to the precision positioning ability of the CNC machine. 80 
sections were used to construct the three-dimensional model of this 
bovine sample, at a resolution of approximately 20 p,m. 

Bone Vol. 21, No. 3 J.D. Beck et al. 283 
September 1997:281-287 Imaging of trabecular bone 
1,0 - 
o~ c d 
0.8 - ~ ~" Specimen tc-24 0.35 
g 06 - 025 
0.4 xH R LLE 0.150"20 
-A "tl - - O.lO 2 0.2 " 
I~. s f .~ 0.05 
.J: 'L ' " -" I-- "1 " 0.0 0.00 
0 50 ,l, 100 150 200 250 
A T Gray Scale Value c /i o" 5o I.r OO lh sholdVaruJ!T 
# voxels (microns): 1~9 (180) I~- 
I ~ ~1 
Q) i , i i ii 
-=  ooHili i > ~ i ~ E ,iii ii 
i lii ii 
~ 5 iiilii II 
o !i ' 
0 10 20 11 (220) L.. ~1 
I ~ ~1 
iiii 
iii lli 
iii 
III 
{ll 
30 
Number of Voxels 6 (120) 
T~r ;ii iii 
i Ji~i iii 
Jill Ell 
i ii 
ii __ 
'ii' 'iiii'ii:' 
40 T*=78 
Figure 4. (a) Histogram of gray-scale values for the complete model of a typical specimen (0 is black, 255 is white). The pure white region (>250) 
is not shown, but would yield a large discrete peak at the right side. The fiat region on the right (gray-scale values >100) is representative of volume 
averaging at the trabecular surfaces. The flatness of this region indicates that the degree of surface volume averaging is approximately constant over 
the surface. Based on the characteristic shape of this histogram, we developed a simple scheme to determine the threshold value that estimates the 
specimen volume fraction in the event that this measurement is not available. The vertical distance, H, is defined as the length between the maximum 
frequency of any gray walue (line c-d) and the average frequency of the flat portion in the region, R (line a-b). Then the horizontal line, e-f, is defined 
as being a fixed fraction X of the distance H measured down from the maximum frequency, where X was chosen as 0.96 by trial-and-error analysis on 
ten bovine specimens. The threshold value, T, is chosen as the lowest gray value at the intersection of the line e-f with the histogram. (b) Distribution 
of gray-scale values across the thickness of three adjacent trabeculae for the same specimen as in (a). Note that each voxel is ~20 p,m wide; the numbers 
on top represent the upper bound on the thicknesses of these trabeculae; and the trabeculae were moved closer together for viewing purposes. The dots 
represent the gray-scale values of each voxel, and the horizontal line represents the threshold value 7"* that yielded the directly measured volume fraction 
for this specimen. Because a plateau gray-scale value of ~40 was reached for each trabecula, and because only one voxel at each surface was usually 
affected by the volume averaging (those voxels with gray-scale values in the range ~50-250), these data indicate that the volume averaging at the 
surface should affect all trabeculae the same once the trabecular thickness is greater than approximately 3-4 voxels (~--60-80 Ixm). This example also 
illustrates how small changes in the threshold value T around 7"* would affect the thickness of these three trabeculae: the left trabecula would not be 
changed, the middle one may lose a voxel, whereas the right one may gain two voxels depending on the change in T. (c) Volume fraction-threshold 
curve (V/vs. T) for the same specimen as in parts (a) and (b). Volume fraction of the entire specimen is computed for each threshold value, and a curve 
is fit to the resulting data points. This curve is then used to identify the threshold value T* that yields the correct volume fraction 1//*. Note the transition 
region, which occurs at a threshold value of approximately 50 for this specimen, corresponds to both the end of the bell region of the histogram in part 
(a) and the plateau region in part (b). As the threshold value is increased beyond this value, gradually more volume-averaged gray voxels along the 
surfaces of the trabeculae are included as bone. Note that the predicted volume fracture here is merely the area integral of the histogram in part (a). 
Thus, the flatness of the region on the right-hand side of the histogram corresponds directly to the constant slope on the right-hand side of this curve. 
lens, camera, and light source to the vertical axis of the milling 
machine, the vertical ,distance between the exposed surface of the 
specimen and both the camera and light is always fixed. This 
ensures equal focus and lighting of every exposed cross-section 
during imaging, while use of the ring-illuminator provides uni- 
form lighting over the entire field-of-view. 
The imaging process itself consists of five steps. First, each 
specimen is gripped in a pneumatic vise mounted to the mill 
table. The cylindrical specimen is oriented with its axis parallel 
to the vertical axis of the milling machine. Second, the milling 
machine is programmed to remove a thin layer (typically 20 ~m) from the specimen using a 3/8 in. carbide-impregnated, two- 
fluted end-mill (Bassett USA, 52032 MSE, Pacific Tool, Oak- 
land, CA) cutting at 500 rpm with a specimen feed rate of 3 
in./min. This tool should be replaced every three or four speci- 
mens because blunting of the tool roughens the machined surface 
and degrades image quality. While milling, a vacuum is used to 
collect the chips as they are cut from the specimen because any 
residual chips could obscure the images. Third, after milling off 
a complete cross-section, the specimen is moved under an air jet 
station where compressed air further cleans the surface of the 
specimen, producing a dust- and chip-free surface for imaging. 

284 J. D, Beck et al. Bone Vol. 21, No. 3 
Imaging of trabecular bone September 1997:281-287 
p ~.~.-. , , ~.. ~ -\, .. ~,.." ~J "1 ~~J. I 
d. .5 t, .5 i 
Figure 5. The arrayed imaging technique. This cross-sectional image of 
a sagittal section (~30 mm x 35 mm) of a human vertebral body has a 
voxel resolution of 20 I-~m, although only a 640 x 480 voxel camera was 
used to obtain the image. The straight lines show the 3 X 3 array of 
regions (nine total) used to image the complete cross-section. Note the 
excellent registration of the images (no overlap is evident at the borders 
of the regions), made possible by the precision positioning ability of the 
CNC milling machine. 
As an optional fourth step, the newly milled surface of the 
specimen is exposed to additional UV light (Quartz Pencil Lamp, 
Spectroline Model 11SC-2, Spectronics, Westbury, NY) to re- 
duce any residual silver in the interior of thick trabeculae. This 
ensures that there are no regions of bone that are not dark black 
(this step is not required for low-density human trabecular bone, 
such as from the vertebral body). Finally, the specimen is moved 
into the camera field-of-view where a digital image of the 
exposed surface is taken. The high contrast of the black/white 
embedded bone specimen, the uniform lighting over the entire 
field-of-view, and the sharp focus all ensure accurate imaging of 
the exposed trabecular microstructure (Figure 2A). 
This fully automated process is achieved by programming the 
above sequence of motions into the CNC milling machine with 
synchronized command signals to the image-grabber board. A C 
program was developed which controls all motions of the CNC 
machine and all aspects of capturing and storing the digital 
images (the CNC custom programming language could also be 
used to control CNC motion). The imaging process was pro- 
grammed to repeat itself until the entire specimen has been 
milled down and each exposed surface imaged. Each digital 
image is saved as a separate file in TIFF format, and all files are 
sent from the imaging PC to a workstation for eventual postpro- 
cessing. Typically, an 8-mm-diameter, 10-mm-long cylindrical 
specimen imaged at 20 Ixm resolution requires over 150 mega- 
bytes of disk space for storage (uncompressed and unprocessed). 
Milling and imaging of each slice takes approximately 2 min, 
although we have not yet attempted to optimize the tool path to 
minimize this time. Thus, for example, an 8-mm-diameter, 10- 
mm-long cylindrical specimen imaged at 20 Ixm resolution 
requires 500 slices and currently takes 16-17 h to process. 
Because the imaging process is fully automated, it is usually 
performed unsupervised overnight, and therefore requires little 
personnel time (~-15 min for initial setup). 
The flexibility of using the CNC milling machine--which is 
designed to position a specimen precisely at any position in the 
base plane perpendicular to the vertical milling tool--enables 
imaging at a resolution that is independent of the specimen size using the "arrayed imaging" technique. To achieve this, the full 
cross-section is divided into an array of equally sized but slightly 
overlapping regions. The CNC machine then moves each region 
of the cross-section into the field-of-view of the (stationary) 
camera, where a digital image is taken of each region. The 
resolution of each regional image is therefore determined only by 
the lens magnification and camera/frame-grabber resolution, and 
is independent of the overall dimensions of the specimen. For a 
fixed resolution, larger specimens are imaged by increasing the 
size of the imaging array e.g., from 1 x 1 to 2 x 2 to 4 × 4. The 
multiple images from each layer are then easily recombined 
during postprocessing because the precise position of each im- 
aging region is stored in the PC that controls the motion of the 
CNC milling machine. 
Three-dimensional image reconstruction is performed using 
routines written in the Interactive Display Language (IDL, Re- 
search Systems Inc., Boulder, CO). The raw gray-scale images 
(Figure 2A) are first processed with a simple filter to eliminate 
any artifacts from air bubbles, should they exist. These artifacts 
show up as light gray voxels between trabeculae, and are easily 
eliminated by deleting light gray regions that are not immediately 
adjacent to dark bone. Next, the images are thresholded into 
black-and-white images (Figure 2B), then stacked on top of each 
other to produce a three-dimensional model (Figure 3). Regis- 
tration depends on the accuracy of the milling machine, and is 
generally not a problem when imaging at 20 Ixm resolution. For 
situations where a higher resolution is required than the accuracy 
of the machine, displacement transducers can be used to record 
more precisely the position of the specimen as it is being imaged. 
Images can then be offset by the recorded distance from a 
specified origin. Registration is done similarly within the plane 
for the arrayed imaging technique. In the direction of milling, the 
depth of each voxel, that is, the out-of-plane resolution, is equal 
to the cutting depth programmed into the CNC machine, and is 
usually set to match the in-plane voxel size. Depending on the 
accuracy and precision of the milling machine, depths can be 
accurately machined to as low as 1 i~m, although we have not 
done so because our current CNC machine does not have such 
resolution. The out-of-plane resolution may also be limited by 
transparency of the whitened methylmethacrylate, although we 
have seen little evidence of this artifact at 20 ixm resolution. 
A constant threshold value is used for all images per speci- 
men due to the uniform lighting provided by the ring illuminator 
and the high-contrast nature of the raw images. A histogram of 
the gray values for a typical specimen demonstrates the sharp 
distinction between gray values associated with bone, and those 
associated with volume averaging at the trabecular surfaces 
(Figure 4A). Further analysis of the gray-scale data across the 
thickness of individual trabeculae (Figure 4B) demonstrates that 
a plateau of gray values (representing bone tissue) was reached 
within trabeculae having thicknesses greater than 60-80 p~m, 
and the volume averaging artifact extended just beyond one 
voxel (20 txm) at each trabecular surface. Thus, thresholding 
affected trabecular thickness equally for all trabeculae with 
thicknesses greater than 60-80 txm. The implication is that a 
single threshold value is reasonable for identifying trabeculae 
above this thickness, and may be appropriate for the entire 
specimen. A corresponding plot of the predicted volume fraction 
of the entire specimen vs. the assumed threshold value (Figure 
4C) further supports use of a single threshold value for the entire 
specimen because the sensitivity of volume fraction to threshold 
value was constant over the region of this curve associated with 
the volume averaging artifact. 
The threshold value can be chosen in two ways. When a direct 
measure of volume fraction is available (e.g., by using 
Archimedes' Principle, 6) the threshold value is chosen graphi- 

Bone Vol. 21, No. 3 J.D. Beck et al. 285 
September 1997:281-2~;7 Imaging of trabecular bone 
A 
L,. B 
Figure 6. Three-dimen,;ional rendered images of the 8-mm-thick human vertebral sagittal section shown in Figure 5. (A) Larger section (7.9 mm 
anterior-posterior × 8.0 mm superior-inferior × 1.44 mm medial-lateral) showing the entrance of the basivertebral vein midway along the posterior 
cortical shell, with clear heterogeneity of the porosity and architecture of the trabecular bone within the adjacent centrum. (B) Smaller section (1.4 X 
1.4 x 1.4 mm 3) taken from the inset of (A), but shown at a slightly different perspective. The trabecula marked with an asterisk has a thickness of 
approximately 160 p~m. 
cally from the volume fraction-threshold value curve so that the 
computed volume fraction of the model equals the directly 
measured value (Figure 4C). When a direct measure is not 
available, we developed a simple algorithm to pick a threshold 
value that, on average, gives excellent agreement with the di- 
rectly measured values (Figure 4A). This algorithm chooses 
threshold values based on the shape of the histogram of gray- 
scale values for the entire specimen, and is therefore specific to 
each specimen. In this way, if lighting or staining conditions vary 
between specimens, the threshold values will be adjusted appro- 
priately. By trial and error, we found a value for the single free 
parameter (X = 0.96; see Figure 4A) in this algorithm that 
resulted in the best aw~rage match between predicted and directly 
measured values. 
Results 
As an example of the arrayed imaging technique, an 8-mm-thick 
sagittal section of a human vertebral body was imaged at 20 p,m 
resolution with a 3 × 3 array of nine images per cross-section 
(Figure 5). Using the digital camera with a resolution of 640 × 
480 voxels per field of view, the effective number of voxels for 
each exposed section was approximately tripled to ~1900 x 
1420, thus maintainin~g the same resolution for the whole sagittal 
section as for an 8-ram-diameter specimen. Three-dimensional 
models of smaller subsets of the full data set were then rendered 
to reveal the microstracture in greater detail (Figure 6). 
To demonstrate rite ability of single-value thresholding to predict accurately the volume fraction of the specimen, data are 
presented for ten bovine tibial specimens that were imaged at 20 
p,m resolution. Beforehand, volume fraction (bone volume/total 
volume) was measured for each specimen using Archimedes' 
Principle, with values ranging from 0.181 to 0.286. The percent- 
age coefficient of variation in volume fraction of six repeated 
measurements on each specimen ranged between 0.13% and 
0.70%, indicating excellent precision of these directly measured 
volume fraction measurements. For the ten specimens, the mean 
(_SD) percentage error between the predicted and measured 
volume fractions was 0.70% _+ 4.28%. It should be noted that 
one specimen--with the lowest volume fraction--had a percent- 
age error of 10.6%, all other errors were in the range -4.36% to 
4.66%. Thus, for most specimens, volume fraction was predicted 
to within ±5% of the correct value. A regression of the two data 
sets (predicted vs. measured) had r 2 = 0.92, with a standard error 
of regression of 0.0095, which was just 4% of the mean volume 
fraction; the slope of the regression was 1.0028, with a statisti- 
cally insignificant (p = 0.94) intercept of -0.0019 (Figure 7). 
Thus, regardless of the measure used to quantify the uncertainty 
introduced by our method of predicting volume fraction, the error 
was small. 
Discussion 
Three-dimensional imaging of trabecular bone has become nec- 
essary to properly quantify architectural parameters such as 
conaectivity and degree of anisotropy, and to generally overcome 

286 J.D. Beck et al. Bone Vol. 21, No. 3 
Imaging of trabecular bone September 1997:281-287 
¢- 
._0 0.30 
o 
0.28 LL 
0.26 E 
"~ 0.24 
> 
"o 0.22 
0.20 
0.18 Y=X 
~" Y = 1.0028 X - 0.0019 
• R 2 = 0.92; SER = 0.0095 /. , 
0.18 0.20 0.22 0.24 0.26 0.28 0.30 
Predicted Volume Fraction 
Figure 7. Plot of the predicted value of volume fraction vs. the directly 
measured value for ten bovine tibial trabecular bone specimens. The 
algorithm described in Figure 4a was used to choose a specific threshold 
value for each specimen. The fit between predicted and measured values 
was excellent (heavy line), with a standard error of the regression (SER) 
in units of volume of only 0.0095 (~4% of the mean volume fraction). 
Performance was poorest for the lowest density specimen, suggesting 
perhaps that higher imaging resolutions or alternative thresholding algo- 
rithms should be used for low-density specimens. 
the restrictions of having to extrapolate two-dimensional stereo- 
logical measures to three dimensions. 4J 1.14,15,17 The CNC mill- 
ing technique described here, although similar in many aspects to 
the serial-sectioning technique developed by Odgaard and col- 
leagues, 14"15 introduces two noteworthy innovations. First, by 
utilizing the programmable nature of the CNC milling machine 
to control precisely the relative positions of the specimen with 
respect to the camera, the arrayed imaging technique frees image 
resolution from specimen size. Thus, the imaging resolution does 
not depend on the specimen size. This allows the technique to be 
used on large specimens such as an entire human vertebral body, 
and also on small specimens such as a rat metaphysis. Whereas 
other techniques such as micro-CT have been used in a similar 
fashion to image large sections of bone at relatively high reso- 
lution, s our method is fully automated in this respect and there- 
fore is easier and more accurate to use for such purposes. Second, 
because of the high-contrast nature of the raw image arising from 
the use of the black silver nitrate staining of the bone and the 
white pigmentation of the embedding medium, as well as the 
uniform lighting and focus of each field-of-view, the resulting 
raw images accurately represent the real bone microstructure and 
postprocessing can be simple. For example, our data suggest that 
complex segmentation and threshold techniques 12'~5 are not 
required with the CNC milling technique, at least for higher 
density bone, because use of a single threshold value for the 
entire specimen yielded only small errors in morphological 
properties such as volume fraction. Clearly, more sophisticated 
algorithms can be used should this performance be unacceptable. 
As such, our technique is well suited for high-resolution, ex situ 
imaging of trabecular bone and may permit early identification of 
subtle disease- or drug-related changes in trabecular architecture 
that might not otherwise be detectable using current techniques. 
Despite the advantages of this new technique, there are some 
limitations. First, like the microtome-based serial-sectioning 
method, 14'15 ours is a destructive imaging technique because the 
specimen is destroyed during the course of imaging. Thus, this 
technique can never be used in situ. Furthermore, all biochemical 
and biomechanical analyses must be done on the specimen 
before imaging, and such analyses must be nondestructive to the trabecular architecture and must not jeopardize the silver nitrate 
staining. A tess important limitation is the long imaging time. 
Chemical processing of the samples can take up to a week, 
although multiple specimens can be processed simultaneously. 
Imaging each embedded specimen currently requires from 16 to 
17 h for a 10-mm-long cylindrical specimen, and 65 to 75 h for 
a whole vertebral body. However, because the system is auto- 
mated and does not require supervision, user time is minimal. 
Typically, specimens are processed overnight such that imaging 
of one 8-10 mm specimen per day is easy to achieve. A third 
limitation is that the single-value threshold scheme employed 
here may not be applicable to specimens of low density that have 
many thin (<60-80-1xm-thick) trabeculae. In that case, we 
recommend use of a higher resolution system or more sophisti- 
cated thresholding algorithms.12'15 It is also possible that the free 
parameter, X, used in our algorithm may be sensitive to density, 
such that an alternative value other than X = 0.96 would give 
better performance for lower density bone. Thus, our method for 
predicting volume fraction with a single threshold value should 
only be used after performing the types of quantitative validation 
studies described here on the particular bone tissue of interest. 
Due to the relative advantages and disadvantages of this 
technique with respect to other available imaging modalities, the 
CNC milling technique is best viewed as complementary to 
existing technologies. Both micro-CT 1,4J1 and micro-MRI 2'9'13 
have the important benefit of being able to generate images 
nondestructively. These techniques must be used if in vivo 
imaging is required or if the specimen is required for any further 
analysis after imaging. Due to its lack of radiation, micro-MRI 
can also be used clinically. However, the resolution of these 
noninvasive techniques is limited, as is access to these technol- 
ogies. These techniques also require complex image postprocess- 
ing, 4'9"12'13 further limiting their availability to the research 
community and requiring expertise in equipment usage and 
image interpretation. Serial sectioning,14'~5 like our CNC milling 
technique, is a destructive imaging method and thus cannot be 
used in vivo or when the specimen is required for further 
analysis. Serial sectioning has the unique advantage over our 
method in its speed, with the capability of imaging a whole 
vertebral body in approximately 2 h. 15 However, like the non- 
destructive imaging techniques, the serial-sectioning technique is 
inherently limited by the dependence of image resolution on 
specimen size. Related to this, for large specimens, the serial- 
sectioning technique as reported 15 requires substantial postpro- 
cessing of the images due to variable lighting conditions and 
image quality over the cross-section. 
Finally, the simplicity and modularity of the CNC milling 
technique present a number of possibilities for further enhance- 
ments. Use of a higher resolution camera would increase reso- 
lutions over those described above, and such an upgrade is 
simple to implement due to the modular nature of the system. It 
may also be possible to differentially stain the bone to identify 
different histologic entities such as newly formed osteoid on 
mineralized bone or bone ingrowth into implants (the CNC 
milling technique can easily mill metallic implants). Use of color 
digital photography for imaging might then enable separation of 
these entities and quantification of their three-dimensional archi- 
tectures. Coupled with its high-resolution capability, such an 
enhancement of the CNC milling technique may greatly improve 
the ability to quantitatively characterize bone responses to im- 
plants and drug treatments in both large and small animal 
models. 
Acknowledgments." This work was supported in part by grants from The 
Whitaker Foundation, NIH AR4 i481, and AR43784, and the Committee 

Bone Vol. 21, No. 3 J.D. Beck et al. 287 
September 1997:281-287 Imaging of trabecular bone 
on Research at UC Berkeley. Thanks also for technical assistance to 
Andy Hsia and Gordon Wong. 
References 
1. Bonse, U., Busch, F., Gunnewig, O., Beckmann, F., Pahl, R., Delling, G., 
Hahn, M., and Graeff, W. 3D computed X-ray tomography of human cancel- 
lous bone at 8 micron spatial and 10 4 energy resolution. Bone Miner 
25:25-38; 1994. 
2. Chung, H. W., WehrlJ, F. W., Williams, J. L., and Wehrli, S. L. Three- 
dimensional nuclear r~agnetic resonance microimaging of trabecular bone. 
J Bone Miner Res 10:1452-1461; 1995. 
3. Engelke, K., Song, S. M., Gliier, C. C., and Genant, H. K. A digital model of 
trabecular bone. J Bone Miner Res 11:480-489; 1996. 
4. Feldkamp, L. A., Goldstein, S. A., Parfitt, A. M., Jesion, G., and Kleerekoper, 
M. The direct examinal:ion of three-dimensional bone architecture in vitro by 
computed tomography. J Bone Miner Res 4:3-11; 1989. 
5. Fyhrie, D. P., Fazzal~xi, N. L., Goulet, R., and Goldstein, S. A. Direct 
calculation of die surface-to-volume ratio for human cancellous bone. J Bio- 
mech 26:955-967; 19913. 
6. Galante, J., Rostoker, W., and Ray, R. D. Physical properties of trabecular 
bone. Calcif Tissue Re:i 5:236-246; 1970. 
7. Goulet, R. W., Goldstein, S. A., Ciarelli, M. J., Kuhn, J. L., Brown, M. B., and 
Feldkamp, L. A. The relationship between the structural and orthogonal 
compressive properties of trabecular bone. J Biomech 27:375-389; 1994. 
8. Guo, X. E., Weissman, D. E., Goulet, R. W., Hollister, S. J., Derwin, K. A., and 
Goldstein, S. A. Characterization of local failure in vertebral trabecular bone. 
Trans 41st ORS 20:53~; 1995. 
9. Hipp, J. A., Jansujwic~:, A., Simmons, C. A., and Snyder, B. D. Trabecular bone morphology from micro-magnetic resonance imaging. J Bone Miner Res 
11:286-292; 1996. 
10. Hollister, S. J., Brennan, J. M., and Kikuchi, N. A homogenization sampling 
procedure for calculating trabecular bone effective stiffness and tissue level 
stress. J Biomech 27:433-444; 1994. 
11. Kinney, J. H., Lane, N. E., and Haupt, D. L. In vivo, three-dimensional 
microscopy of trabecular bone. J Bone Miner Res 10:264-270; 1995. 
12. Kuhn, J. L., Goldstein, S. A., Feldkamp, L. A., Goulet, R. W., and Jesion, G. 
Evaluation of a microcomputed tomography system to study trabecular bone 
structure. J Orthop Res 8:833-842, 1990. 
13. Majumdar, S., Newitt, D., Jergas, M., Gies, A., Chiu, E., Osman, D., Keltner, 
J., Keyak, J., and Genant, H. Evaluation of technical factors affecting the 
quantification of trabecular bone structure using magnetic resonance imaging. 
Bone 17:417-430; 1995. 
14. Odgaard, A., Andersen, K., Melsen, F., and Gundersen, H. J. A direct method 
for fast three-dimensional serial reconstruction. J Microsc 159:335-342; 1990. 
15. Odgaard, A., Andersen, K., Ullerup, R., Frich, L. H., and Melsen, F. Three- 
dimensional reconstruction of entire vertebral bodies. Bone 15:335-342; 1994. 
16. van Rietbergen, B., Weinans, H., Huiskes, R., and Odgaard, A. A new method 
to determine trabecular bone elastic properties and loading using microme- 
chanical finite element models. J Biomech 28:69-81; 1995. 
17. Zhu, M., Keller, T. S., Moeljanto, E., and Spengler, D. M. Multiplanar 
variations in the structural characteristics of cancellous bone. Bone 15:251- 
259; 1994. 
Date Received: May 15, 1996 
Date Revised: April 23, 1997 
Date Accepted: May 20, 1997 

