ELSEVIER Bone Vol. 21, No. 3 
September 1997:243-247 
Leukemia Inhibitory Factor Is Mitogenic to Osteoblasts 
J. CORNISH, 1 K. E. CALLON, 1 S. G. EDGAR, 2 and I. R. REID l 
Departments of 1 Medicine and 2 Pathology, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand 
Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) regulates cell growth and is 
produced by a variety of tissues, including bone. Previously 
we have shown that recombinant human LIF induced an 
increase in osteoclast number, bone formation, and DNA 
synthesis. In the present study, we have defined the cells in 
intact bone at which the proliferative effects of LIF occur, 
using simultaneous enzyme histochemistry and autoradio- 
graphic techniques. The area of alkaline phosphatase-posi- 
tive staining was increased twofold (p = 0.0008) and the 
number of [3H]thym~dine-positive cells was increased two- 
fold (p = 0.0024) in I IF-treated bones. The radiolabeled cells 
either colocalized with alkaline phosphatase or were in the 
osteoprogenitor regi,~n. They were not found in the acid 
phosphatase-positive staining osteoclasts. These results indi- 
cate that cells which have a mitogenic response to LIF are 
bone-forming rather than bone-resorbing cells. (Bone 21: 
243-247; 1997) © 1997 by Elsevier Science Inc. All rights 
reserved. 
Key Words: Leukemia inhibitory factor; Calvaria; Histochemi- 
cal; Alkaline phosphal~se; Acid phosphatase; Autoradiography. 
Introduction 
Growth factors and cytokines are important in the localized 
regulation of bone cell function, in an autocrine or paracrine 
manner. Leukemia inl~Jbitory factor (LIF), a single-chain glyco- 
protein (molecular weight of 58,000), is a pleiotrophic cytokine 
which acts on blood cells, embryonic stem cells, hepatocytes, and 
neuronal and adipose tissue, as well as bone. I° LIF is character- 
ized by its ability to induce differentiation of a murine myeloid 
leukemic cell line; however, the molecule can promote both 
suppression and stimulation of proliferation and/or differentia- 
tion of different leukemic cell lines. 25 
Transcription of the LIF gene has been detected at low levels 
in normal adult tissues. 4 L1F levels are elevated in septic shock 
and in various inflamrnatory body fluids, including the synovial 
fluid from subjects wil:h inflammatory arthritis. 27 LIF appears to 
be primarily a locally acting molecule, with its circulating con- 
centrations being maintained at low levels. LIF or its transcripts 
have been detected in vitro in many cell types, including fibro- 
blasts, T lymphocytes, bone marrow stromal cells, and osteo- 
blasts. LIF production can be induced by various stimuli includ- 
ing lipopolysaccharide, interleukin-1, transforming growth 
factor-13, and tumour necrosis factor. 16 These findings suggest 
Address for correspondence and reprints: Dr. J. Cornish, Department of 
Medicine, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92-019, Auckland, New 
Zealand. E-mail: j.cornisi~@auckland.ac.nz that LIF is an inducible cytokine that is produced by a wide 
variety of cells and tissues including osteoblasts, z'6"27 
We have previously demonstrated that LIF increases DNA 
synthesis in bone, and there is evidence of increases in the 
activity or number of both osteoclasts and osteoblasts. 12'13 In in 
vitro studies, we have shown that LIF stimulates bone resorption, 
and this is associated with a near doubling of the number of 
active osteoclasts in neonatal mouse calvariae. 22 At low concen- 
trations, however, LIF predominantly stimulates DNA synthe- 
sis, 13 indicating that it may play a role in the physiological 
regulation of bone cell function. The LIF-stimulated increase in 
bone resorption is prostaglandin dependent, whereas the stimu- 
lation of DNA synthesis is independent of prostaglandin produc- 
tion. The effects of LIF on osteoblast cell cultures are complex, 
with cell growth and the synthesis of enzymes and bone matrix 
proteins being regulated. 2"6'8'2°'2s Furthermore, some effects of 
LIF are inconsistent between different models. In a fetal rat long 
bone organ culture system, LIF inhibits bone resorption, and the 
rate of DNA synthesis is not changed, 11 suggesting that the 
species used, the time course of experiments, and the state of 
osteoblast differentiation may affect the cellular response. 
In an in vivo study in which mice were engrafted with a 
hematopoietic cell line modified to produce high levels of LIF, 
Metcalf and Gearing demonstrated an increase in bone mass with 
the formation of irregularly shaped bone trabeculae in the bone 
marrow at the ends of the long bones, as well as some evidence 
of cortical bone resorption. 17 In another in vivo study 19 involving 
repeated intraperitoneal injections of LIF, no specific bone 
changes were noted. We have demonstrated that LIF accelerates 
bone turnover locally in a prostaglandin-independent manner in 
normal mice studied in vivo. 5 
In light of our earlier studies in which there were increases in 
thymidine incorporation as well as in indices of both osteoblast 
and osteoclast activity following exposure to LIF in vitro, the 
present study set out to determine in which cell population(s) the 
increase in DNA synthesis occurs. We used autoradiography to 
localise [3H]thymidine incorporation and enzyme histochemistry 
to identify mature osteoblasts and osteoclasts. These techniques 
also allow a detailed description of the effects of LIF on the 
activity and distribution of these cell types in intact bone. 
Materials and Methods 
Materials 
Recombinant murine LIF was kindly provided by Dr. Nicola and 
Dr. Gough, Walter and Eliza Institute (Melbourne, Australia). 
LIF was produced in Escherichia coli, as previously described. 7 
LIF activity of 50 U/mL is defined as the concentration that 
induces 50% of M1 cells to exhibit differentiation. 18 
© 1997 by Elsevier Science Inc. 243 8756-3282/97/$17.00 All rights reserved. PII $8756-3282(97)00144-0 

244 J. Cornish et al. Bone Vol. 21, No. 3 
LIF is mitogenic to osteoblasts September 1997:243-247 
Experimental Design 
Bone organ culture. The hemicalvaria of 6-day-old mice from a 
single litter were dissected out as described previously. 22 Cal- 
variae were preincubated for 24 h in minimal essential medium 
with 1% charcoal-stripped, heat-inactivated serum, then changed 
to fresh medium containing LIF (300 U/mL) or vehicle. Incuba- 
tion was continued for a further 24 or 48 h. There were ten 
calvariae in each group. 
[3H]thymidine pulse label for autoradiography, The cal- 
variae were pulse-labeled with [3H]thymidine (TRK 565; Amer- 
sham, UK) for the last hour of the incubation period, at a dose of 
5 p~Ci/mL. In further experiments, the calvariae were pulse- 
labeled with thymidine for the first 6 h of the incubation period 
to determine whether LIF affects proliferation of osteoblast and 
osteoclast precursor ceils. 
Histology. At the end of the incubation period, the specimens 
were washed in media with cold thymidine. The hemicalvariae 
were bisected through the parasagittal plane and used for the 
following enzyme histochemical studies. The tissue was fixed in 
cold 2% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 mol/L cacodylate buffer for 30 
min at 4°C. Following fixation, the bones were washed in further 
cacodylate buffer and dehydrated at 4°C in glycol methacrylate 
in water (1 h in each of 50%, 70%, 95%, and 100%), followed by 
three 1-h changes in LR white resin (London Resin Company 
Ltd, Hants, UK). Polymerization of the resin was carried out on 
ice to minimize depression of enzyme activity by this exothermic 
reaction. Serial 1.5 Ixm sections were cut on a Reichert-Jung 
microtome (Austria). The sections were mounted on vectabond- 
coated slides and air-dried before further processing. 
Staining for alkaline phosphatase. A simultaneous coupling 
azo-dye method was employed for demonstration of alkaline 
phosphatase activity. The substrate used was 5-bromo-4-chloro- 
3-indolyl phosphate (BCIP) and the diazotized coupler employed 
was Nitro blue tetrazolium (NBT). Combined BCIP/NBT tablets 
were used (Sigma Diagnostics, St. Louis, MO). Incubations of 
sections were carried out for 30 min in the dark at 37°C. Because 
the prepared staining solution deteriorates rapidly, it was filtered 
and used immediately. This staining process, using new reagents, 
was repeated to obtain the desired intensity of staining. The 
sections were thoroughly washed in distilled water before pro- 
ceeding to the acid phosphatase staining. 
Staining for acid phosphatase. A azo-dye method compara- 
ble to that described for alkaline phosphatase was employed to 
demonstrate acid phosphatase activity. The substrate used was 
naphthol AS-BI phosphate (Sigma Diagnostics) in N,N-dimethyl 
formamide (Sigma), and the diazotized coupler employed was 
Fast garnet GBC (Sigma) in acetate-tartrate buffer (pH 5.0). The 
sections were incubated for 1 h at 37°C. This staining process 
was repeated using new reagents to obtain the desired intensity of 
staining. Finally the sections were washed in distilled water and 
air-dried before processing for autoradiography. 
Autoradiography. Slides that had been histochemically 
stained were subsequently dipped in Kodak NTB2 emulsion 
(diluted 1:2 with distilled water) heated to 42°C. After coating, 
the slides were air-dried at room temperature, then stored in 
light-tight boxes and left to expose at 4°C for 2 weeks. The slides 
were developed in Kodak D19 (1:2) at 20°C for 2 min, fixed in 
Hypam (Ilford Australia Ltd., Sydney, Australia) rapid fixer (1:4) 
for 2 min, washed in distilled water for 5 min, and air-dried. 
Sections were counterstained with 1% Fast green. Histomorphometry and data analysis. The slides were exam- 
ined under an Olympus BX 50 microscope (Olympus Optical Co. 
Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) which was attached to an Osteomeasure 
Image Analyzer (Osteometrics, Inc., Atlanta, GA). Histomorpho- 
metric analyses were made of four adjacent fields (using a X20 
objective) of parasaggital sections of hemicalvariae, enabling an 
examination of all levels of the calvariae from the frontal bone 
through the coronal suture and parietal bone to the lambdoidal 
suture. The following parameters per millimeter calvaria were 
measured: the area of alkaline phosphatase staining, the number 
of positive-staining acid phosphatase cells, and the number of 
radiolabeled cells. Data were compared between control and 
LIF-treated calvariae and the differences were analyzed using 
Student's t-test. 
Results 
Both alkaline phosphatase and acid phosphatase activities as well 
as tritiated-thymidine-labeled nuclei were demonstrated simulta- 
neously in sections of neonatal mouse calvariae, as illustrated in 
Figure 1. The alkaline phosphatase activity stained blue to 
purple in a highly localized pericellular pattern at bone sites 
immediately adjacent to the mineralized bone (i.e., in osteoblasts 
and possibly some of their progenitor cells). Fibroblasts, their 
progenitor cells, and other cells in the peripheral regions of the 
periosteum were not stained. The acid phosphatase activity 
stained red and was confined mainly to the cell cytoplasm of the 
osteoclasts with occasional staining of the bone matrix adjacent 
to osteoclasts, presumably where enzymes had been released. 
The osteoclasts were located both at the marrow-bone interface 
and at the periosteal-bone surface. The autoradiographic silver 
grain deposits of the radiolabeled thymidine were highly local- 
ized over cell nuclei and there was very little nonspecific back- 
ground grain deposition. These thymidine-labeled nuclei colo- 
calized with alkaline phosphatase-positive cells or cells in the 
osteoprogenitor zone (defined as the cells located in the perios- 
teum between the osteoblast layer and the fibroblastic cells) but 
not with acid phosphatase-positive cells in both LIF-treated and 
control bones incubated for 24 or 48 h. In bones which were 
pulse-labeled for an extended period of time (6 h) at the begin- 
ning of the culture, there were still no cells exhibiting thymidine- 
labeled nuclei which were also acid phosphatase-positive. Con- 
sequently, although this increased time of pulse-labeling at the 
beginning of the culture would have enabled any proliferating 
preosteoclasts to become labeled with [3H]thymidine and then 
later become incorporated into mature acid phosphatase-positive 
cells, this did not occur. 
Leukemia inhibitory factor-treated bones exhibited signifi- 
cant morphological changes compared to control. There was a 
significant increase in the area of alkaline phosphatase staining in 
the bone tissue incubated with LIF, compared to control tissue 
(Figure 2). The staining appeared to be less intense in the control 
bone tissue compared to the LIF-treated tissue. LIF also signif- 
icantly increased the number of acid phosphatase-positive oste- 
oclasts (Figure 3). When [3H]thymidine was incorporated for the 
last 4 h of the incubation period, there was a significant increase 
in the number of radiolabeled nuclei which colocalized with the 
alkaline phosphatase-positive ceils in the LIF-treated bones (Fig- 
ure 4), but no significant change in the number of these labeled 
nuclei colocalizing with cells in the osteoprogenitor zone in the 
periosteum (Figure 5). 
Discussion 
We have used a combination of enzyme histochemistry and 
autoradiography to demonstrate that LIF is mitogenic to osteo- 

Bone Vol. 21, No. 3 J. Cornish et al. 245 
September 1997:243-247 LIF is mitogenic to osteoblasts 
Figure 1. Photomicrograph of a calvaria treated with LIF, simultaneously demonstrating acid phosphatase-positive cells (a), alkaline phosphatase 
staining (b), and tritiated thymidine-positive nuclei (c). Original magnification ×900. 
blasts in intact bone. The findings indicate that LIF stimulates 
proliferation of mature alkaline phosphatase-positive osteoblasts 
rather than preosteoblasts located in the osteoprogenitor region. 
The results of this study suggest that there is no proliferation of 
preosteoclasts or acid phosphatase-positive osteoclasts in this 
neonatal mouse organ culture system. LIF significantly increased 
the number of acid phosphatase-positive osteoclasts; however, 
there were no thymidine-labeled nuclei that colocalized with 
these cells. Consequently, LIF may stimulate differentiation of 
existing osteoclasts, but the present findings indicate that LIF 
does not stimulate proliferation in osteoclasts or osteoclast pre- 
cursor cell populations. 
The results of this study are consistent with our previous in vitro and in vivo studies, in which we found increases in cell 
proliferation in LIF-treated osteoblast-like cells isolated from 
fetal rat calvariae, increases in osteoclast number and bone 
resorption, and increases in DNA synthesis in neonatal mouse 
calvariae exposed to LIF and an overall increase in bone turnover 
associated with increases in osteoblast and osteoclast numbers in 
adult mice where LIF is injected locally above the bone. Others 
have identified LIF as an osteoclast-stimulating factor ] which 
induces an increase in bone resorption in cultures of murine 
calvariae 9 but inhibits resorption in organ cultures of mouse fetal 
long bones, 11,26 models in which resorption is mostly dependent 
on osteoclast precursor differentiation. An in vivo study in which 
mice were engrafted with nonleukemic hemopoietic cells that 
0:0075- 
,m 
.__. "~ -~ ~ - 0oo5o- 
m ~ ~ 0.0025- 
'~o t- 
o. 
0.0000 ---- // Control LIF 4- 
e- 
T: 3- 
"-~a 
2 
o e- 
o,. 
0 -- 
Control LIF 
Figure 2. Effect of LIF on alkaline phosphatase activity. Data are the 
mean +- SEM and are expressed per millimeter length of calvaria. 
* Significant difference from control (p = 0.0008). Figure 3. Effect of LIF on numbers of acid phosphatase-positive cells. 
Data are the mean _+ SEM and are expressed per millimeter length of 
calvaria. * Significant difference from control (p = 0.018). 

246 J. Cornish et al. Bone Vol. 21, No. 3 
LIF is mitogenic to osteoblasts September 1997:243-247 
.=_'~ 
~0~ 
~o ®.; ~ e" ,13 
z "N -~ 
n 7.5- 
5.0- 
2.5- 
0.0 -- / Control LIF 
Figure 4. Effect of LIF on number of thymidine-positive cells colocal- 
izing with alkaline phosphatase. Thymidine incorporation was measured 
over the last 4 h of the incubation period. Data are the mean + SEM and 
are expressed per millimeter length of calvaria. * Significant difference 
from control (p = 0.0024). 
produced high levels of LIF resulted in an increase in the 
deposition of new bone and a possible increase in osteoblast 
numbers. 17 Osteoblastogenesis is also increased in bone marrow 
cultures treated with LIF. 24 The effects of LIF on osteoblast 
proliferation in cell line cultures are variable, with a decrease 
being detected in murine osteogenic sarcoma UMR-106 cells,12 
whereas in the murine MC3T3-E1 cells, LIF has been found to 
either inhibit 2° or increase cell growth, 3 or exert no effect. 8 A 
recent study has also demonstrated that LIF is mitogenic to 
isolated human osteoblast-like cells. 6 
Our present findings, demonstrating that LIF causes an in- 
crease in the area of alkaline phosphatase staining, confirm some 
previous studies. LIF increases the alkaline phosphatase activity 
induced by retinoic acid in preosteoblastic cell lines 23 and 
UMR-201. 2 In human osteoblasts, there was generally no effect 
of LIF on basal and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-induced alkaline 
phosphatase activity; yet, one culture in which the 1,25-dihy- 
droxyvitamin D3-induced alkaline phosphatase levels were 
low--a potentiation of the 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 effect by 
LIF--was observed. 6 In two recent studies, LIF increased alka- 
line phosphate activity in undifferentiated mesenchymal progen- 
itors of the bone marrow 24 and in MC3T3-E1 cells. 3 This is in 
contrast to an earlier study in the same cell line, in which LIF was 
found to decrease the basal alkaline phosphatase levels. 2° Sim- 
ilarly, LIF decreased alkaline phosphatase in rat calvarial cell 
cultures grown to quantify bone nodule production. 14 Since total 
alkaline phosphatase activity is dependent on both cell differen- 
tiation and cell number, these variable effects of LIF on this 
1.00 
e- ~ 0.75 
"~_~ ~ 
°.5° 
ZO a., 
0.00 
Control LIF 
Figure 5. Effect of LIF on number of thymidine-positive cells in the 
osteoprogenitor zone of the periosteum. Thymidine incorporation was 
measured over the last 4 h of the incubation period. Data are the mean +_ 
SEM and are expressed per millimeter length of calvaria. index may just reflect the model-to-model differences in its 
action on cell proliferation, referred to earlier. 
Osteoblasts are target cells for LIF in bone, and it is likely that 
this is a direct effect, with receptors for LIF having been 
identified on mature osteoblasts and their precursors. 2 On the 
other hand, LIF is likely to stimulate osteoclasts indirectly to 
increase bone resorption via the osteoblast. Highly purified 
isolates of osteoclasts have not been found to respond to LIF) 5 
Leukemia inhibitory factor is synthesized by the osteoblast 
and its production is influenced by other cytokines; for example, 
it is increased by tumor necrosis factor. 2 LIF has been found to 
be produced both as a diffusible protein and in an immobilized 
form associated with the extracellular matrix in fibroblast cul- 
tures. 2] It is possible, then, that LIF made by the osteoblast is 
stored in the bone matrix and further LIF is released with the 
increased bone resorption. LIF may also interact with and influ- 
ence the production of other local growth factors in bone and act 
as an autocrine/paracrine regulator of osteoblast and osteoclast 
function and differentiation, t5 
In conclusion, the present data in intact bone confirm that the 
osteoblast is the principal bone cell showing a mitogenic re- 
sponse to LIF. These data, along with previous in vitro and in 
vivo findings, support the role of LIF as a significant cytokine 
involved in the local regulation of normal bone cell function. 
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by the Health Research 
Council of New Zealand and the Auckland Medical Research Founda- 
tion, New Zealand. The authors are grateful to Lesley Scott for technical 
assistance. 
References 
1. Abe, E., Tanaka, H., Ishimi, Y., Miyaura, C., Hayashi, T., Nagasawa, H., 
Tomida, M., Yamaguchi, Y., Hozumi, M., and Suda, T. Differentiation- 
inducing factor purified from conditioned medium of mitogen-treated spleen 
cell cultures stimulates bone resorption. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
83:5958-5962; 1986. 
2. Allan, E. H., Hilton, D. J., Brown, M. A., Evely, R. S., Yumita, S., Metcalf, D., 
Gough, N. M., Ng, K. W., Nicola, N. A., and Martin, T. J. Osteoblasts display 
receptors for response to leukemia-inhibitory factor. J Cell Physiol 145:110- 
119; 1990. 
3. Belido, T., Borba, V. Z. C., Stnhl, N., Yancopoulos, G., Jika, R. L., and 
Manolagas, S. C. Cilary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) and leukemia inhibitory 
factor (LIF) stimulate cell proliferation and increase alkaline phosphatase and 
interleukin-6 production by osteoblastic cells. J Bone Miner Res 10(Suppl 
1):$319; 1995. 
4. Bhatt, H., Brunet, L. J., and Stewart, C. L. Uterine expression of leukemia 
inhibitory factor coincides with the onset of blastocyst implantation. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 88:11408-11412; 1991. 
5. Cornish, J., Callon, K., King, A., Edgar, S., and Reid, I. R. The effect of 
leukemia inhibitory factor on bone in vivo. Endocrinology 132:1359-1366; 
1993. 
6. Evans, D. B., Gerber, B., and Feyen, J. H. M. Recombinant human leukemia 
inhibitory factor is mitogenic for human bone-derived osteoblast-like cells. 
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 199:220-226; 1994. 
7. Gough, N. M., Gearing, D. P., King, J. A., Willson, T. A., Hilton, D. J., Nicola, 
N. A., and Metcalf, D. Molecular cloning and expression of the human 
homologue of the murine gene encoding myeloid leukemia-inhibitory factor. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85:2623-2627; 1988. 
8. Hakeda, Y., Sudo, T., Ishizuka, S., Tanaka, K., Higashino, K., Kusuda, M., 
Kodama, M., and Kumegawa, M. Murine recombinant leukemia inhibitory 
factor modulates inhibitory effect of 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3 on alkaline 
phosphatase activity in MC3T3-E1 cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 
175:577-582; 1991. 
9. Ishimi, Y., Abe, E., He Jing, C., Miyanra, C., Hong, M. H., Oshida, M., 
Kurosawa, H., Yamagushi, Y., Hozumi, M., and Soda, T. Leukemia inhibitory 
factor/differentiation-stimulating factor (LIF/D-factor): Regulation of its pro- 
duction and possible roles in bone metabolism. J Cell Physiol 152:71-78; 1992. 

Bone Vol. 21, No. 3 J. Cornish et al. 247 
September 1997:243-24'7 LIF is mitogenic to osteoblasts 
10. Kurzrock, R., Estrov, Z., Wetzler, M., Gutterman, J. U., and Talpaz, M. LIF: 
Not just a leukemia inhibitory factor. Endocrine Rev 12:208-217; 1991. 
11. Lorenzo, J. A., Sousa, S. L., and Leahy, C. L. Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) 
inhibits basal bone resorption in fetal rat long bone cultures. Cytokine 2:1-5; 
1990. 
12. Lowe, C., Cornish, J., Callon, K., Martin, T. J., and Reid, I. R. Regulation of 
osteoblast proliferation by leukemia inhibitory factor. J Bone Miner Res 
6:1277-1283; 1991. 
13. Lowe, C., Cornish, J., Martin, T. J., and Reid, I. R. Effects of leukemia 
inhibitory factor on bone resorption and DNA synthesis in neonatal mouse 
calvaria. Calcif Tissue lint 49:394-397; 1991. 
14. Malaval, L., Gupta, A. K., and Aubin, J. E. Leukemia inhibitory factor inhibits 
osteogenic differentiatiJn in rat calvafia cell cultures. Endocrinology 136: 
1411-1418; 1995. 
15. Martin, T. J., Allan, E. H., Evely, R. S., and Reid, I. R. Leukemia inhibitory 
factor and bone cell ~unction. In: Block, G. R. and Widdows, K., Eds. 
Polyfunctional Cytokines: IL-6 and LIF. Chichester, UK: Wiley; 1992; 
141,155. 
16. Metcaif, D. The leukenTia inhibitory factor (LIF). Int J Cell Cloning 9:95-108; 
1991. 
17. Metcalf, D. and Gearing, D. P. A fatal syndrome in mice engrafted with cells 
producing high levels cf the leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF). Proc Natl Acad 
Sci 86:5948-5952; 1989. 
18. Metcalf, D., Hilton, D. L, and Nicola, N. A. Clonal analysis of the action of the 
murine leukemia inhibilory factor on leukemic and normal murine hemopoietic 
cells. Leukemia 2:216-.221; 1988. 
19. Metcalf, D., Nicola, N. A., and Gearing, D. P. Effects of injected leukemia 
inhibitory factor on he~nopoietic and other tissues in mice. Blood 76:50-56; 
1990. 
20. Noda, T., Vogel, R. I_,., Hasson, D. M., Nicola, N. A., and Rodan, G. A. 
Leukemia inhibitory factor suppresses proliferation, alkaline phosphatase ac- 
tivity and type I collagen mRNA level and enhances osteopontin mRNA levels in murine osteoblast-like (MC3T3-E1) cells. Endocrinology 127:185-190; 
1990. 
21. Rathjen, P. D., Toth, S., Willis, A., Heath, J. K., and Smith, A. G. Differen- 
tiation inhibiting activity is produced in matrix-associated and diffusible forms 
that are generated by alternate promoter usage. Cell 62:1105-1114; 1990. 
22. Reid, I. R., Lowe, C., Cornish, J., Skinner, S. J. M., Hilton, D. J., Willson, 
T. A., Gearing, D. P., and Martin, T. J. Leukemia inhibitory factor: A novel 
bone-active cytokine. Endocrinology 126:1416-1420; 1990. 
23. Rodan, S. B., Wesolowski, G., Hilton, D. J., Nicola, N. A., and Rodan, G. A. 
Leukemia inhibitory factor binds with high affinity to preosteoblastic RCT-I 
cells and potentiates the retinoic acid induction of alkaline phosphatase. 
Endocrinology 127:1602-1608; 1990. 
24. Takahashi, K., Manolagas, S. C., and Jika, R. L. Leukemia inhibitory factor 
(LIF) stimulates osteoblastogenesis from undifferentiated mesenchymal pro- 
genitors of the bone marrow. J Bone Miner Res 10(Suppl 1):$317; 1995. 
25. Tomida, M., Yamamoto-Yamaguchi, Y., and Hozumi, M. Purification of a 
factor inducing differentiation of mouse myeloid leukemic MI cells from 
conditioned medium of mouse fibroblast L929 cells. J Biol Chem 259:10978- 
10982; 1984. 
26. Van Beek, E., Van Der Wee-Pals, L., Van de Ruit, M., Nijweide, P., Papo- 
poulos, S., and Lowik, C. Leukemia inhibitory factor inhibits osteoclastic 
resorption, growth, mineralization, and alkaline phosphatase activity in fetal 
mouse metacarpal bones in culture. J Bone Miner Res 8:191-199; 1993. 
27. Waring, P., Wycherley, K., Cary, D., Nicola, N., and Metcalf, D. Leukemia 
inhibitory factor levels are elevated in septic shock and various inflammatory 
body fluids. J Clin Invest 90:2031-2037; 1992. 
Date Received: January 7, 1997 
Date Revised: May 22, 1997 
Date Accepted: May 27, 1997 

